Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
© 2011, 2007 South-Western, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright hereon
may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means—graphic, electronic,
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, Web distribution,
information storage and retrieval systems, or in any other manner—except as
may be permitted by the license terms herein.
ExamView® is a registered trademark of eInstruction Corp. Windows
is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation used herein under
license. Macintosh and Power Macintosh are registered trademarks of
Apple Computer, Inc. used herein under license.
© 2008 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009944006
ISBN-13: 978-0-538-45048-5
ISBN-10: 0-538-45048-7
South-Western Cengage Learning
5191 Natorp Boulevard
Mason, OH 45040
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com/school
Technical Writing for Success, 3e
Smith-Worthington/Jeﬀ erson
Vice President of Editorial, Business:
Jack W. Calhoun
Vice President/Editor-in-Chief: Karen Schmohe
Senior Developmental Editor: Penny Shank
Consulting Editor: Marianne Miller
Editorial Assistant: Anne Kelly
Associate Marketing Manager: Linda Kuper
Content Project Management: PrePress PMG
Media Editor: Sally Nieman
Senior Manufacturing Coordinator: Kevin Kluck
Copyeditor: Daniel Nighting
Senior Art Director: Tippy McIntosh
Internal Designer: Joe Sherman
Cover Designer: Lou Ann Thesing
Cover Image: ©James Endicott/Stock
Illustration Source
Photo Researcher: Darren Wright
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 13 12 11 10
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
iii
Chapter 4 Writing Process
Introduction
Sample First Draft of an Introduction
in a Report
A Process for Technical Writing
Planning
Drafting and Revising
Copyediting and Publishing
Writing Collaboratively
Chapter 4 Review
Chapter 5 Brief Correspondence
Introduction
Sample Memo
Sample Letter: Positive Message
Introduction to Text Messages, E-mails,
Memos, and Letters
Audience
Prewriting
Formatting
Composing the Message
Chapter 5 Review
Chapter 6 Document Design
and Graphics
Introduction
Sample Document with Graphics
Designing the Document
Who Reads Graphics?
Designing Graphics
Constructing Graphics
Chapter 6 Review
Contents
Chapter 1 What Is Technical Writing? 2
Introduction
Sample Technical Document Excerpt
Sample Research Paper Excerpt
Sample Personal Essay Excerpt
You Are a Technical Writer!
Characteristics of Technical Writing
How Technical Writing Compares
to Other Writing
Chapter 1 Review
Chapter 2 Audience and Purpose
Introduction
Sample Document Written for
a Specific Audience
Meeting the Audience’s Needs
Planning Your Document’s Purpose,
Scope, and Medium
Chapter 2 Review
Chapter 3 Technical Research
Introduction
Sample Working Bibliography
Conducting Technical Research
Researching at Work
Finding Secondary Data
Documenting Secondary Sources
Evaluating Sources
Taking Notes from Sources
Collecting Primary Data
Chapter 3 Review
iv | Contents
Chapter 7 Writing for the Web
Introduction
Sample Web Page
Getting Started on Web Pages
Organizing and Designing Web Pages
Writing Text for the Web
Special Web Pages
Chapter 7 Review
Chapter 8 Informative Reports
Introduction
Sample Technical Process Description:
How an Incandescent Lightbulb Works
Getting Started on Informative Reports
Summary and Abstract
Mechanism Description
Periodic Reports
Progress Reports
News Releases
Chapter 8 Review
Chapter 9 Investigative Reports
Introduction
Sample Incident Report
Incident Report
Trip Report
Science Lab Reports
Forensic Reports
Chapter 9 Review
Chapter 10 Instructions
Introduction
Sample Instructions
Getting Started on Instructions
Organizing and Formatting Instructions
Composing Instructions
Chapter 10 Review
Chapter 11 Employment
Communication
Introduction
Sample Resume
Getting Started on Employment
Communication
Formatting and Organizing
Resumes
Types of Resumes
Composing Resumes
Composing Employment Letters
Chapter 11 Review
Chapter 12 Presentations
Introduction
Sample Presentation Graphics
Getting Started on Presentations
Planning
Organizing and Composing
Preparing
Rehearsing
Presenting
Organizing a Group Presentation
Chapter 12 Review
Chapter 13 Recommendation
Reports
Introduction
Sample Recommendation Report
What Is a Recommendation Report?
Starting a Recommendation Report
Contents | v
Formatting and Organizing
Recommendation Reports
Composing Recommendation Reports
Chapter 13 Review
Chapter 14 Proposals
Introduction
Sample Proposal
What is a Proposal?
Getting Started on Proposals
Composing Informal Proposals
Composing Formal Proposals
Chapter 14 Review
Chapter 15 Ethics in the Workplace 362
Introduction
Ethical Principles for Technical
Communicators
What Is Ethics?
Creating a Culture of Ethics
What Do You Do When Faced with
an Ethical Dilemma?
Why Is It So Difficult to Behave Ethically?
Chapter 15 Review
Chapter 16 Technical Reading
Introduction
Sample of Technical Reading
Technical Reading vs. Literary
Reading
Before You Read
As You Read
Chapter 16 Review
Inside Track
You Attitude
Tone
Parallelism
Economy
Using Numbers
Clarity
Active and Passive Voice
Gender-Unbiased Language
Effective Transitions
Glossary
Index
vi
An Applied Approach to Workplace Writing!
GETTING STARTED
NG STARTED
134 | Chapter 6
134 | Chapter 6
Document Design
and Graphics
WRITE TO LEARN
Using words only, write directions from your school to your home. Then
draw a map with arrows to show the same route. Which is easier to
understand—the written directions or the map? In a short journal entry,
explain why.
Chapter
Goals
Design an effective document for the
◾
audience and purpose
Determine the audience and purpose of
◾
graphics
Format graphics to make them easy to
◾
understand
Construct graphics for the audience and
◾
purpose
Terms
bar graph, p. 149
◾
callouts, p. 159
◾
chart, p. 155
◾
decision flowchart, p. 155
◾
design elements, p. 138
◾
diagram, p. 159
◾
exploding pie graph, p. 154
◾
flowchart, p. 155
◾
formal table, p. 147
◾
Gantt chart, p. 157
◾
graphics, p. 140
◾
icon, p. 159
◾
informal table, p. 146
◾
line graph, p. 151
◾
multiple bar graph, p. 150
◾
multiple line graph, p. 151
◾
organizational chart, p. 156
◾
pictograph, p. 152
◾
pie graph, p. 153
◾
verbal tables, p. 143
◾
Focus on Document Design and Graphics
Read the sample document on the next page and answer these questions:
Describe what you see on the page. What percentage of information is
•
devoted to words? to graphics?
Has anything special been done with the words to make them stand out?
•
If so, which words and why do they stand out?
Do the graphics help present the message? Explain.
•
Where do the words explain or introduce the graphics?
•
What If?
The medium were a 24"
•
3 36" poster or trifold brochure?
A PowerPoint® presentation provided this information?
•
The insert were designed for second-graders?
•
page
What percentage of information is
h the
y sta
essa
oduc
ster
ded
nd-g
Document Design and Graphics | 135
Sample Document with Graphics
a
G
hy.
Gra
on Document Design and
on Document Design and Gra
TERMS are highlighted
and defined in the
chapter.
GOALS are clearly
defined learning
objectives to guide
learning.
WRITE TO LEARN
activity prepares
students for the
chapter’s detailed
instruction.
WHAT IF? questions
relating to the sample
documents provide
students with critical-
thinking opportunities.
Real-world Sample
Documents add
relevance to the chapter.
FOCUS ON… provides
questions to help students
analyze the sample document
on the facing page.
W
elcome to Technical Writing for Success 3e. This text is lively and
relevant for students and easy to use and effective for instructors.
Using a learn-by-doing approach, skills are introduced and applied so
that mastering technical writing is relevant and exciting.
s
hi s p 140
vii
A LOOK INTO THE
REAL WORLD OF
TECHNICAL WRITING
Writing@Work
Aidan Grey is a freelance
graphic designer in Denver,
Colorado, and former
Director of Photography for
Home&Abroad (H&A), a travel
planning website. He has 13 years of graphics expertise,
including contracting with photographers, publishing images
in print and on the Web, and designing logos.
Aidan believes that a picture is worth a thousand words,
but not necessarily in English. “There’s a different kind of
eloquence in graphics because we get to use many additional
‘languages’ simultaneously—color, texture, composition,
line, light. Red is one ‘word’ and says one kind of thing, while
blue is another and says other things.” In other words, it’s important to be
sensitive to the “linguistics” and semiology (signs and symbols) of images.
The various constraints that Aidan considers when working with graphics
include content, color, licensing and copyright, cost, lighting, size, and
composition. He judges which constraints to prioritize on a project-by-project
basis, but always gives credit when using others’ work: “You’re never going to
get in trouble for crediting someone properly.”
Knowing when images hurt your content is as important as knowing when
they enhance it. “Images are not helpful when they are too busy and when they
contradict the desired message,” cautions Aidan. For example, “If your report
is about why the company is not meeting goals, images of smiling, happy
people can send a decidedly wrong message.” Images should enhance and
complement the message of the text they accompany.
Aidan’s graphic design work requires him to use communication skills along
with his graphics virtuosity. At H&A, for example, he wrote contracts, form
letters, manuals, and e-mail messages and even translated documents into
other languages for investors.
Think Critically
1. With a partner, select a photograph in this book to analyze. Individually, jot
down some notes about the “languages” the photo uses.
2. Compare notes with your partner. Does the photograph “say” more than
you thought at first? Explain.
Printed with permission of Aidan Grey
Courtesy of Aidan Grey
136 | Chapter 6
Writing@Work
Andrew Yoder has been a book
production editor for Rowman
& Littlefield Publishers in
Lanham, Maryland, for
nine years. He shepherds
books through copyediting, proofreading, indexing, cover
production, and finally manufacturing. Most of his technical
communication involves e-mailing authors, freelancers, and
in-house colleagues. He also is a book author and freelance
writer and editor.
To begin a writing project, Andrew first gathers all of the
resources he needs into one electronic file, organizes the
contents of the file into smaller themed sections, and then
finds the best section with which to start. “I’ll occasionally read the quotes
[in the file] and try to think about different angles and sections while doing
mind-numbing tasks like mowing my yard.”
Recently, Andrew talked with his fellow Rowman & Littlefield editors about how
they approach writing. Each editor takes a different approach: “One colleague
said she writes out a very detailed outline that serves as a draft replacement.
Another coworker said that she doesn’t draft; she just writes. That’s me. Any
revising that I do is more like copyediting than working from a draft.”
Authors should not be afraid of the copy editor’s red pen. After Andrew sends
one of his own completed manuscripts to his copy editor, he hopes to receive
a great many questions and corrections that will improve the book. “Some
authors are offended when someone edits their work or asks questions, but
I’d rather have a copy editor find mistakes in my work than have a reader find
them.” Furthermore, says Andrew, “The biggest enemy of revising or editing
material is a large ego.”
Think Critically
1. How would your instructors react if you had outside copy editors correct
your work before you turned it in? Why is writing at school different from
writing on the job?
2. Look at the section in this chapter “Writing Is Different for Everyone”
on page 80. Why do different people use different approaches to writing
assignments?
Printed with permission of Andrew Yoder
kertlis/iStockphoto.com
78 | Chapter 4
CAREER CLUSTERS
The U.S. Department of
Education has grouped careers
into 16 different clusters based
on similar job characteristics.
The value:
Allows students to explore
◾
a wide range of career
opportunities from entry
level through management
and professional levels
Provides an easy solution
◾
to implementing careers into
any class
WRITING @ WORK addresses
the 16 Career Clusters and
demonstrates various career
options while showcasing
people who use technical
writing in their careers.
viii
TWO NEW
CHAPTERS
164 | Chapter 7
Writing for the Web
WRITE TO LEARN
Think about all of the ways you use the Internet. Then try to imagine your
life without the Internet. What would it be like? Write a short journal entry
describing how your life would be different if there were no Internet.
Chapter
Goals
Plan web pages
◾
Organize and design web pages
◾
Write text for web pages
◾
Write text for special kinds of web pages
◾
Terms
animation, p. 172
◾
blog, p. 179
◾
demographics, p. 169
◾
discussion forum, p. 182
◾
FAQ, p. 180
◾
home page, p. 168
◾
hyperlink, p. 170
◾
interactive, p. 167
◾
Internet, p. 167
◾
keywords, p. 177
◾
RSS, p. 180
◾
scannable, p. 176
◾
usability, p. 172
◾
Web Accessibility Initiative
◾
(WAI), p. 173
wiki, p. 181
◾
World Wide Web,
◾
p. 167
Focus on Writing for the Web
Read the sample document on the next page and answer these questions:
What is the reason for the site?
•
Describe the color scheme. How does it make you feel?
•
Does the page look balanced? Why or why not?
•
What information is on the page? Is it easy to fi nd? Explain.
•
If you were a newcomer to the site, which part would you visit? If you had
•
visited the site before, which part might you revisit?
What combination of text and graphics do you see?
•
What If?
The site provided FAFSA forms for different majors or different schools?
•
The site provided a survey to determine eligibility for fi nancial aid?
•
An upcoming deadline was given for submission of FAFSA forms?
•
The site highlighted college graduates who had used fi nancial aid?
•
The site hosted its own discussion forum?
•
164 | Chapter 7
362 | Chapter 15
Ethics in the Workplace
Chapter
Focus on the Ethics in the Workplace
Read the ethical principles on the next page and answer these questions:
Why does the Society for Technical Communication (STC) list the six core
•
values in this order?
What are fi ve things technical communicators can do to practice honesty?
•
How can technical communicators maintain professionalism?
•
Why do the principles include confi dentiality?
•
What If?
The principles were being explained to students considering a career as a
•
technical communicator?
Technical communicators needed STC guidelines for writing blogs and text
•
for web pages?
A banking or fi nance industry wanted to use similar principles?
•
Goals
Explain what it means to act ethically
◾
Describe a culture of ethics
◾
Develop a plan for resolving an
◾
ethical dilemma
Understand the barriers to ethical
◾
behavior
Terms
code of ethics, p. 369
◾
corporate code of ethics,
◾
p. 369
dignity, p. 375
◾
ethics, p. 365
◾
personal code of ethics, p. 370
◾
principles, p. 365
◾
rights, p. 375
◾
utility, p. 375
◾
values, p. 365
◾
whistle-blower,
◾
p. 377
WRITE TO LEARN
Think of someone you admire and respect, someone you want to be
like—a parent, friend, teacher, or political or entertainment fi gure. What, in
particular, has this person done to earn your respect? If you were to ask this
person what values—for example, honesty, hard work, and courage—are
important, what would he or she say? Write a journal entry describing this
person and naming some of his or her accomplishments. Summarize by
identifying which values are important to this individual.
ETHICS IN THE WORKPLACE
includes information about ethical
conduct, develops a plan for resolving
an ethical dilemma, and discusses
barriers to ethical behavior.
WRITING FOR THE WEB
discusses blogs, FAQs, and home
pages and provides information
on organizing, designing, and
writing web pages.
ix
SPECIAL FEATURES
ENHANCE LEARNING
COMMUNICATION
DILEMMA
provides real-world
communication
situations.
STOP AND THINK
allows students to check
comprehension before
moving to the next section.
FOCUS ON ETHICS
provides examples and
scenarios of real-world
ethical dilemmas for
students to consider.
WARM UP
activities provide
scenarios and
questions to
encourage
students to start
thinking ahead.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
contains helpful
information about
current workplace
technologies.
NET BOOKMARK
provides chapter-
related activities for
students to complete
using information
found on the Internet.
x
ABUNDANT END-OF-CHAPTER ASSESSMENT
The assessments found at the end of every chapter give students the
opportunity to test their knowledge.
VISIT WWW.CENGAGE.COM/SCHOOL/BCOMM/TECHWTG
This interactive site provides an array of teaching and learning tools to assist you in getting the most from your course.
Writing for the Web | 183
Chapter 7
Review
SUMMARY
1. When creating a web page, know how users read and interact with
material, determine your purpose, defi ne your audience, and fi nd out
the technology limitations of your audience.
2. When organizing and designing a web page, choose a system of
internal links, create web pages that are easy to use and attractive,
and keep the design consistent and accessible.
3. When writing web pages, create unique page titles, write to your
audience, organize using an inverted pyramid, compile factual
content, use original language, and construct scannable text.
4. When writing home pages, blogs, wikis, FAQs, or discussion forums,
follow established protocols.
Checklist
Have I defi ned my audience?
◾
Have I written web pages that adjust to the unusual way readers read them?
◾
Have I considered the technology limitations of my audience?
◾
Have I determined my purpose and included it in a slogan on the website?
◾
Do my text and graphics support my purpose?
◾
Have I organized my website using a workable system of internal links?
◾
Have I designed attractive web pages with easy-to-locate information for
◾
visitors to my site?
Do my pages load quickly?
◾
Have I written text that uses unique page titles, is written directly to my
◾
audience, organizes material in an inverted pyramid, is factual, avoids
clichés, and uses standard English?
Have I written scannable text with short paragraphs, informative headings,
◾
lists, and keywords in the fi rst 50 words?
Have I followed standard protocol for my home page, blog, FAQ, wiki, and
◾
discussion forum?
way rea
audienc
slogan o
em of int
ocate info
written dir
d, is factu
, informa
e, blog, FA
184 | Chapter 7
Build Your Foundation
1. Rewrite these sentences, breaking them into shorter sentences and
deleting extra words.
a. We offer Spanish tutorials and practice for the beginner as well as the
intermediate Spanish learner on a variety of topics so a traveler can
feel comfortable traveling in a Spanish-speaking country.
b. Take time to visit our website at www.homedezigns.com to see the
latest collection of living room, bedroom, and kitchen furniture along
with accessories such as lamps, vases, and art—from contemporary to
traditional.
c. Because water conservation is important, there are many ways people
can help conserve water, including taking showers instead of taking
baths and running the washer and running the dishwasher only when
they are full.
d. Spruce up your resume, network with the right people, and organize
your job search to increase your chances of fi nding a job so it does not
take you the normal four to six months to fi nd one.
2. Brainstorm possible slogans, color schemes, graphics, and links for one
of these sites. Conduct research if you need to familiarize yourself with
the type of business. Share your written plan with the class.
a. Nehu’s Chiropractic Care, new to the area, wants a site that describes
services and teaches the public about the value of chiropractic care.
b. Krischler’s Insurance Services offers personal and commercial policies,
including car, home, long-term care, life, and commercial, for a small
community.
c. Beach Getaway is a real estate agency specializing in ocean view
rentals for family vacations.
d. Eastern Music Company sells musical instruments to school bands.
e. Helping Handz is a charity organization in North Dakota that collects
winter coats for children in grades K–12.
3. Improve the following block of text by breaking it up into three
paragraphs and shortening some of the sentences.
Global warming—the explanation goes something like this: Energy
from the sun heats the earth, and then some of that energy is sent back
into space in the form of infrared radiation. A portion of that outgoing
radiation, though, is blocked from escaping into space by the earth’s
relatively thin atmosphere—a good thing because the infrared radiation
that remains stabilizes the earth’s temperature. A problem occurs when
the atmosphere, subjected to increasing amounts of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases, thickens to trap more of the sun’s infrared
energy, preventing its escape from Earth. More trapped energy raises
global temperatures—thus the term global warming. Global warming
can drastically alter the climate. The predictions are frightening: melting
polar ice caps, rising ocean levels, category 5 hurricanes. Are these dire
predictions true? Are we really in a period of global warming? The body
of scientifi c evidence does suggest that global warming is a reality.
4. Go to About Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:About)
to learn more about this open source wiki. Make a list of what you learn.
ntry.
com to see the
n furniture along
m contemporary to
many ways people
instead
hwasher
ple, and
a job so
.
, and link
arize you
e class.
a site that
chiroprac
commerci
mercial, fo
g in ocean
s to school
Dakota tha
up into three
ike this: Ene
t energy is se
ion of that ou
pace by the ea
the infrared ra
problem occur
of carbon diox
e of the sun’s i
pped energy ra
ng. Global warm
re frightening:
ricanes. Are the
al warming? Th
rming is a realit
wiki/Wikipedia
a list of what yo
Writing for the Web | 185
Your Turn
1. Create a sketch of a home page on a topic of interest. Draw your page, cut
pictures out of magazines, download clip art, write or key names of links,
and come up with the slogan. If you are familiar with HTML code or a
web authoring system such as Dreamweaver®, design the page yourself.
2. Find two websites—one that follows most of the guidelines presented in
the chapter and one that does not. Write a one-page analysis explaining
why one website is more effective than the other. Use bulleted lists to set
up your comparison and introduce each list with a couple of sentences.
3. Write a FAQ on a topic of your choice. Choose from your school, your
major, your job, or any topic with which you are familiar.
4. Use the topic below to practice the collaboration required by a wiki.
Working with four of your classmates, enter the passage in a word
processor. Send the fi le to each member of your group—perhaps over
several days. Each person should fi nd one or two errors and add one or
two pieces of information to make the passage more interesting. Remember
to provide references if you quote or introduce new information.
Henry David Thoreau was born July 17, 1812, and died May 6 1862. He
was an American poet, essayist, naturalist, and song writer. He was a
strict abolitionist. His transcentral views can be seen in his lectures and
most notably in his book Weldene. Perhaps his most infl uential work is
“Civil Disobedience” which was inspired by his time spent in Portugal.
“Civil Disobedience” infl uenced such political leaders as George
Washington, Martin Luther King, and Mahatma Gradson.
5. For this mock wiki, work in groups of fi ve. In your group, pass around
the terms one at a time—perhaps over several days. Each person
defi nes two terms and adds one or two pieces of information or deletes
information that should be more accurate.
blog
wiki
breadcrumb trails
Wikipedia
RSS
hyperlink
discussion forum
keywords
6. Write a discussion response to these questions: How has the Internet
helped you in your education? What have you learned from this chapter?
7. Go to Google Groups at http://groups.google.com. Join a discussion
group that you fi nd interesting. Respond using the strategies presented in
the chapter. Print your responses and submit them to your instructor.
Community Connection
1. Write a FAQ about a topic related to your school or community—such as
how to establish residency, how to join a community group, or how to select
an area restaurant. Ask if your FAQ can be placed on the organization’s
website or place your FAQ in a central location such as a bulletin board.
2. Interview a blogger or a web designer. Ask about the challenges of
blogging or designing a website. Write a summary of the interview.
3. Find someone in your community who has little Internet experience.
Show that person how to conduct an online search. If necessary, meet at
a public place that has computers and an Internet connection.
1. Wr
ho
an
w
2. In
b
3. F
S
a
Bu
ganizing and designing a web page, choose a system of
inks, create web pages that are easy to use and attractive,
the design consistent and accessible.
riting web pages, create unique page titles, write to your
, organize using an inverted pyramid, compile factual
use original language, and construct scan
riting home pages, blogs, wikis, FAQs, or
tablished protocols.
t
ned my audience?
mpile factual
nnable text.
discussion forums,
SUMMARY reviews the key concepts of the chapter.
BUILD YOUR FOUNDATION and
YOUR TURN include practice exercises,
applications, and opportunities for
writing to reinforce and assess learning.
CHECKLIST encourages students to be responsible for their own success.
COMMUNITY CONNECTION encourages
students to work on projects outside the classroom
to gather information from their community.
THE INSIDE TRACK, which is
located at the end of the book,
contains 24 pages of suggestions
and tips for improving technical
writing style.
n
king them into shorter sentences and
d practice for the beginner as well as the
xi
About the Authors
Darlene Smith-Worthington and Sue Jefferson are full-time teachers who are enthusiastic and earnest
supporters of education that prepares people for the world of work. Darlene Smith-Worthington is a
community college instructor who also has experience editing a weekly newspaper; directing public
relations for a junior college; and managing small businesses, including a farming operation. Sue
Jefferson’s business experience includes managing a restaurant and editing copy for a weekly magazine.
Early in her teaching career, she taught grades 7–12. Currently, she chairs the English and Humanities
Department at Pitt Community College, where she teaches mythology, critical thinking, and technical
writing classes.
Both authors have taught technical communication for more than 25 years. Using their business
backgrounds and their combined 50 years’ teaching experience, the authors present real-world-based
reporting materials and sensible, useful teaching suggestions.
REVIEWERS
Sara A. Baker
Career and Technology Instructor
Anna High School
Anna, Texas
Sheri Carder
Marketing and Management
Professor
Lake City Community College
Lake City, Florida
Hilary Hall
English and Humanities
Adjunct Instructor
Central Carolina Community
College
Sanford, North Carolina
Mark Hall
Humanities Instructor
Central Carolina Community
College
Sanford, North Carolina
Linda Hoff
Curriculum Supervisor
Century Career Center
Logansport, Indiana
Amy Jauman
Field Training and
Development Manager
Regis Corporation
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Becky Kammeyer
Business and Marketing
Teacher and Coordinator
Mississinewa High School
Gas City, Indiana
Amy J. Major, NBCT
Department Chair and
English Teacher
Roanoke Rapids High School
Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina
Linda O’Connor
Communication Specialist
Las Vegas, Nevada
Phyllis Porche
Instructor
Fox College
Bedford Park, Illinois
Christine Sandusky
English Teacher
Elk River High School
Elk River, Minnesota
Candace Schiffer, M.A.
Business, Computer,
Information, and Technology
Administrator and Lecturer
Mercyhurst College
Erie, Pennsylvania
Kevin Weeks
Business Education Teacher
and Department Chair
Battle Ground High School
Battle Ground, Washington
Mary Whited
English and Business Education
Teacher
Anacortes High School
Anacortes, Washington
2 | Chapter 1
What Is Technical Writing?
WRITE TO LEARN
Think about the many types of writing you do—for example, writing for
school, on your job, in a diary or journal for self-expression, or to family and
friends. With what kind of writing are you most comfortable? What kind
of writing do you fi nd most diffi cult or most uncomfortable? Of the writing
you do, which would you consider to be technical writing? How would you
defi ne the term technical communication?
Chapter
Goals
Define technical writing and its importance
◾
in the workplace
Identify the characteristics of technical
◾
writing
Compare and contrast technical writing to
◾
other types of writing
Terms
academic writing, p. 15
◾
ambiguous, p. 16
◾
expository writing, p. 11
◾
expressive writing, p. 11
◾
field research, p. 11
◾
imaginative writing, p. 16
◾
inferences, p. 16
◾
jargon, p. 12
◾
persuasive writing, p. 15
◾
style, p. 12
◾
technical communication,
◾
p. 7
technical writing, p. 7
◾
tone, p. 13
◾
Focus on Technical Writing
Read the sample writing excerpts on pages 3–5 and answer these questions
about each document:
What is the subject?
•
For whom was the document written?
•
How is the document organized?
•
How would you describe the writer’s (or writers’) style?
•
What is the tone of the document?
•
Does the document include any special features (for example, boldfacing,
•
numbering, bulleted lists, visual aids, headings, or subheadings)?
What Is Technical Writing? | 3
Sample Technical Document Excerpt
S
l T
h i
l D
t E
t
4 | Chapter 1
Bloomberg 1
Jackie K. Bloomberg
Professor Kellogg
HSC 2132
December 3, 20—
Advantages of Porcine Valves in Heart Valve Replacement Surgery
Surgical techniques and materials for heart valve replacement surgery, pioneered in the 1950s,
have constantly improved since then. One of the improvements for some paents involves the use of
porcine, or pig, valves, rather than mechanical or man-made valves. While mechanical valves are long-
lasng, paents who receive them must forever take an-coagulant medicaons to prevent clots
forming on the mechanical valve; such a clot could cause a heart aack or stroke (Gillinov). In addion,
paents on an-coagulants must be closely monitored by their physicians. For people living in remote
areas or areas with limited physician coverage, close monitoring may be impossible. Furthermore,
women with plans of childbearing should not be treated with an-coagulants (“Valve Surgery Opons”).
Thus, the use of porcine valves in mitral valve replacement is best for many paents.
Porcine valves oﬀer one important advantage over mechanical valves, a decreased threat of blood clots.
Regardless of their exact characteriscs, bioprostheses or live ssue replacement parts are unlikely to
lead to the formaon of blood clots aer they have been in place for more than a few months. The body
tends to cover these valves with a thin layer of its own cells, eﬀecvely walling oﬀ the prosthec valve
from the body's blood-clong cells. As a result, most paents with a bioprosthesis can stop using blood
thinners a few months aer surgery (“Living”).
Sample Research Paper Excerpt
Bloomberg 12
Works Cited
Gillinov, Marc A., et al. “Valve Surgery—Past, Present, and Future.” Cleveland Clinic Miller Family Heart
& Vascular Instute. Web. 18 Mar. 2009.
“Living with an Arﬁcial Valve.” Harvard Heart Leer. 4.11 (July 1994): 4+. MasterFILE Premier. Web. 8
Apr. 2009.
“Valve Surgery Opons.” Women’s Heart Foundaon. Web. 6 Apr. 2009.
What Is Technical Writing? | 5
My Broken Heart
By Jessica S. Stuart
My big brother Danny was my hero. He was the one I rant to with skinned knees, the one I
talked to about boys, and the only person I would let call me Nellie. I looked up to him. But the night of
my Senior Sports Banquet, things changed. My hero fell.
Danny didn’t show up for the banquet. He had promised to be there, to share my “moment.”
Aer all, he had taught me how to throw the knuckle ball that had helped our team win the Regional
Soball Championship. I kept looking for him. He must be held up in traﬃc, I told my friends, or maybe
he had a ﬂat re. I picked up several awards that night—including Most Valuable Player—but I would
have preferred to have seen my brother walk through the door. Instead, Danny never showed up.
In fact, Danny hadn’t shown up for much of anything my senior year—holidays, birthdays,
anniversaries. He spent most of his me geng high—marijuana at ﬁrst, then other drugs. When we did
see him, he was incoherent or mean, hounding my mom for money or stealing it out of her purse.
I held ght to my trophy and fought back the tears—unl I got home. Staring at the pictures of
us on my nightstand, I cried all night for my big brother Danny, an addict. Today I’m sorry for him, but
I’m sorry for me too. There’s a big hole in my heart where Danny, my hero, used to be.
Sample Personal Essay Excerpt
6 | Chapter 1
Writing@Work
Mark Overbay manages
marketing and communications
for Counter Culture Coffee, a
Durham, North Carolina–based
specialty coffee organization. His
many responsibilities include producing product copy, white
papers, advertisements, packaging copy, online content,
thematic signage, and tradeshow displays.
“Marketing is a form of storytelling,” says Mark, who believes
that marketing copy must be “short and sweet.” “You only
have a few words or phrases to ‘hook’ your readers, whether
they are journalists reading a press release or grocery shoppers
glancing at the coffee bags on a shelf. Good marketing copy
must tell an interesting, sometimes even romantic story, but it should never be
long-winded.”
Mark’s biggest technical writing challenge involves presentation and style:
“Developing a Counter Culture Coffee ‘voice’ that authentically represents
our company and all that we do is the most difficult aspect of my professional
writing. When I write for our online news section or blog, I can write as Mark
Overbay; but most of my professional writing is in the voice of Counter Culture
Coffee, which represents not just me, but more than 40 staff members and
hundreds of partnering coffee farmers.”
Mark relies heavily on e-mail. “E-mail, for all its limitations and sterility, is
invaluable in my professional life. Not only does it allow for structured written
communication and instant delivery, but it also provides a permanent record of
every e-conversation.”
Mark advises aspiring technical writers to hone three skills in particular:
(1) work ethic to constantly improve their writing; (2) preparation and care
for each assignment because “. . . every word and detail matters. Successful
communicators take the time to research their subjects thoroughly”; and
(3) clarity because “successful communicators keep things simple—not dumbed
down—and to the point. Be clear, concise, and confident in your message.”
Think Critically
1. Search for the Counter Culture Coffee website and sample some of the
writing. Does the writing tell stories, as Mark claims? Do you hear a
distinctive “voice” in the writing? Explain.
2. What is a white paper? Research the origin of this term. What are some
topics about which Mark might write papers?
Printed with permission of Mark Overbay
Courtesy of Mark Overbay
What Is Technical Writing? | 7
Use the You Are a Technical
Writer worksheet as a guide
to brainstorm the types of
technical writing you already
know. Go to www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 1;
then click Data Files.
YOU ARE A TECHNICAL WRITER!
Have you ever given someone written directions or drawn a map to your
home? Have you ever written brief instructions for how to use a fax machine
at work? Have you ever told someone how to make French toast? If you
answered yes to any of those questions or have had similar experiences, you
have already engaged in technical writing or technical communication.
Definition of Technical Writing
Candace, an award-winning saxophonist, began teaching saxophone lessons
to sixth graders. For the fi rst lesson, she drew a diagram of an alto sax and
created a step-by-step guide explaining how to take the instrument apart
and reassemble it. When she saw how easily students could follow her
instructions, she was pleased that her words were helping them learn to do
something she enjoyed.
Candace might have been surprised to learn that she was using technical
communication. Technical communication is communication done in
the workplace. The message usually involves a technical subject with a
specifi c purpose and audience. The approach is straightforward. Candace
was giving practical information to a specifi c audience—information that
would enable her audience to take action. When she referred to the diagram
and explained the procedure aloud to her students, she was using technical
communication. When she wrote the instructions to accompany her
diagram, she was using technical writing. Technical writing is writing done
in the workplace, although the workplace may be an offi ce, a construction
site, or a kitchen table. The subject is usually technical, written carefully for
a specifi c audience. The organization is predictable and apparent, the style
is concise, and the tone is objective and businesslike. Special features may
include visual elements to enhance the message.
Think about a profession in
which you are interested.
What kinds of documents
would you write in this
profession?
Warm Up
ksalt/iStockphoto.com
8 | Chapter 1
Technical documents can range from a half-page memo announcing
the winner of a sales competition to a 500-page research grant proposal
requesting money to test a new drug for treating obesity. The term technical
writing describes documents produced in areas such as business, science,
social science, engineering, and education. Sales catalogs, business letters,
fi nancial reports, standard operating procedures, medical research studies,
lab reports—all of these and more are examples of technical writing.
Technical Writing Is Essential in the Workplace
Written communication is essential in the workplace for many reasons. It
allows readers to read and study at their convenience, easily pass along
information to others, and keep a permanent record for future reference.
Regardless of the career you choose, you will write in the workplace.
According to Paul V. Anderson in Technical Communication: A Reader-
Centered Approach, conservative estimates suggest that you will spend at
least 20 percent of your time writing in a technical or business occupation.
Professionals in engineering and technology careers spend as much as
40 percent of their time writing.
In today’s business environment, employees can easily be overwhelmed by
information overload, with information competing for their attention from
every direction—television, radio, newspapers, magazines, books, e-mail, the
Internet, CD-ROMs, and DVDs. Because of information overload, you must
be able to read documents quickly and effi ciently, understand them the fi rst
time you read them, and know that the information is accurate. Up-to-date
information provides companies with a competitive edge, speeding critical
decision making and allowing job specialization.
Good writers understand that
they will not always know
who is reading their writing
(especially e-mail) or how
their writing will be used.
jhorrocks/iStockphoto.com
What Is Technical Writing? | 9
Technical writers who help companies manage the information overload are
vital resources. They understand that their readers must be able to skim or skip
text and fi nd important information quickly. As a professional in great demand,
the technical writer faces a challenging, exciting, and rewarding future.
Different careers generate different kinds of reports: Nurses chart a patient’s
medical condition so that the next shift’s nurses can continue patient care.
Police accident reports record facts for later use in court. Chemists and
engineers document procedures to comply with government regulations.
Accountants prepare annual client reports. Sales representatives write
sales proposals. Professors write grant proposals. Park rangers write safety
precautions. Insurance claims adjusters write incident reports. Travel agents
design brochures. Public relations offi cers write news releases, letters, and
speeches.
When you write, you demonstrate your ability to analyze, solve problems,
and understand technical processes. For example, Matheus Cardoso,
personnel director for Osgood Textile Industries, impresses his supervisor
and earns his colleagues’ respect when his proposal for tax-deferred
retirement plans is approved. On the other hand, the drafting crew at
Stillman Manufacturing is frustrated with Jeff Danelli’s instructions for
installing wireless computing at the industrial site. The crew must redraft
plans because Jeff’s instructions are vague and incomplete. When writing
is not clear, the thinking behind the writing may not be clear either.
All careers rely on technical communication to get the job done. Technical
writing is the great connector—the written link—connecting technology to
user, professional to client, colleague to colleague, supervisor to employee,
and individual to community. No matter what career you choose, you can
expect to read and compose e-mail, send accompanying attachments, give
and receive phone messages, and explain procedures.
©Borodaev, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
10 | Chapter 1
In addition to work-related writing, the responsibilities of being a community
and family member require technical communication. The following list
shows how Sergeant Thomas Hardy of the Palmer City Police Department,
father of two and concerned citizen, uses technical communication on the
job and at home.
Colleagues:
◾
e-mail, collaborative incident reports
Boy Scout den parents:
◾
fund-raiser announcements, directions to
jamboree
Victims:
◾
incident reports, investigative reports
Legislators:
◾
letter and e-mail in favor of clean-air regulations
Lawyers, court offi cials:
◾
depositions, testimonies, statements
(possibly televised)
State FBI offi ce:
◾
letter of application and resume to advance career
Community members:
◾
safety presentation at the local high school
Supervisees:
◾
employee regulations, letters of reference, training
procedures
Local newspaper editor:
◾
letter thanking community for its help with
jamboree, press release announcing purchase of state-of-the-art police car
ftwitty/iStockphoto.com
STOP AND THINK
Discuss the importance of technical writing in the workplace. How can writing
affect your chances for advancement?
What Is Technical Writing? | 11
CHARACTERISTICS OF TECHNICAL WRITING
While technical writing shares some characteristics with other kinds of
writing, it is also signifi cantly different. From the factual treatment of the
subject to audience considerations, technical writing is unique. Subject,
audience, organization, style, tone, and special features all contribute to the
description of writing that is appropriate for the workplace.
Subject
The subject of each model
at the beginning of this
chapter is hearts, but the
approach is different in each
document. The personal
essay expresses a young
person’s disappointment
and frustration at the
behavior of a sibling, an
experience with which you
might be able to identify.
Expressive writing is
created to convey personal
observations or feelings.
It relies on personal
experience for research.
Expressive writing is likely
to be the type with which
you are most familiar.
The purpose of the
research paper is not to
relate personal experience,
but to explain facts gained
from research. Writing
to explain or inform is
expository writing. Like
expressive writing, your academic career has probably required that you do
some research writing. The excerpt from the research paper at the beginning
of the chapter involves the pros and cons of using tissue from pigs for heart
valve replacement in humans. While most academic research papers are
factual papers written on topics that are interesting to the reader, the technical
research document is written to fulfi ll a need.
In technical writing, often the need is to share information or to have someone
perform an action. For example, a person may need to have heart surgery.
Therefore, the technical document fulfi lls the special needs of a specifi c reader.
The writer of the technical document on page 4 targets cardiac patients and
explains the disease and its diagnosis. Technical writing may require library
research, scientifi c observation, or fi eld research (research done in the fi eld,
especially through surveys and interviews). Whether to inform or persuade,
technical writing relies on data presented with precision and accuracy.
Review the three documents
at the beginning of the
chapter (pages 3–5). Have
you written or read similar
types of documents? If so,
why? What was the situation?
Which of the documents
would you use to make
a decision or to perform
an action? Which type of
document would you prefer
to write? Why?
Warm Up
sjlocke/iStockphoto.com
12 | Chapter 1
Audience
The writer of the personal essay expects some understanding
from his or her readers as they share experiences. The writer
also expresses his or her point of view. The writer of the
research paper may be interested in the subject and hopes that
a reader will read the research paper for its facts.
The technical writer, however, expects more from a very
specifi c reader—one needing information about mitral valve
replacement and possessing some knowledge of the topic and
its specialized vocabulary. The technical writer not only expects
the reader to understand the writing, but also wants the reader
to do something after reading—decide on surgical options.
When you want something specifi c from a reader, you must
work hard as a writer to meet the reader’s needs.
In technical writing, the needs of the reader dictate every
decision the writer makes. In the Sample Technical Document
Excerpt on page 3, the writer worked hard to present the
information the reader needs in a format that is easy to read.
The headings, boldfaced type, visual aids, and no-frills language
show that the writer is conscious of the reader.
Organization
The personal essay and research paper make standard use of a
topic sentence and transitional expressions, but you still need
to read far into each document before the main point and the
organization become apparent.
However, the Sample Technical Document Excerpt uses headings to help
you perceive the organization at a single glance. Questions in the headings
draw your attention to the information this document provides even before
you read it. Also, headings give you an opportunity to read only what you
want or need to read. When a person who has not been diagnosed wants to
learn about symptoms, the heading “How do I know that I have mitral valve
prolapse?” allows his or her eye to travel quickly to the information needed.
Style
The style of a document, the way an author uses words and sentences,
usually gives the audience an idea of the type of document they are reading.
For example, the personal essay is casual, almost conversational, and
predictable for an essay. The writer uses examples and some description.
The style of the research paper also is predictable for a research paper—
formal and more distant than the personal essay, with a thesis to clarify the
purpose of the paper and documentation to enhance credibility.
The technical document uses a simple, concise, straightforward style that is
easily understood. The long sentences are simply lists. The other sentences
are short, and the sentence order is predictable. There are no surprises for
the reader. Jargon, the highly specialized language of a particular discipline
or technical fi eld, is used.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Technical writers must be familiar with
desktop publishing software. Using
programs such as Microsoft® Word, Adobe®
PageMaker®, and QuarkXPress®, technical
writers can apply special features (for
example, boldfaced type, bulleted lists, and
tables) to their documents. In addition, they
can add visual aids such as diagrams, charts,
and graphs to enhance the message.
To practice applying special features,
complete the Communication Technologies
worksheet available at www.cengage.com/
school/bcomm/techwtg. Click the link for
Chapter 1; then click Data Files.
Think Critically
Does your composing process change
when you lack knowledge of software? For
example, if you do not know how to insert
tables or bulleted lists in a document, do you
approach the writing diﬀ erently? Explain.
What Is Technical Writing? | 13
Tone
Tone refers to emotional overtones—the way the words make a person feel.
It describes the emotional character of a document. The tone of a document
also hints at the kind of document the audience is reading.
The tone of the personal essay is casual, dejected, and agonized. The tone of
the research paper is generally objective. The tone in technical writing is best
described as objective or businesslike.
The expressive nature of a personal essay can display a range of emotions—
sadness, excitement, irony, humor. The aim of research papers and technical
documents is not to convey emotion. In fact, emotion can get in the way of a
technical document.
Readers of technical documents read for information, not for entertainment.
They read to learn something or to take action. Some people say that technical
writing is boring because of its lack of emotion. However, for the person needing
or wanting that information, the targeted audience, the topic is not boring.
Special Features
The Sample Technical Document Excerpt is the only document of the samples
on pages 3–5 to use special features. Technical writers use special features
such as boldface, italics, capital letters, columns, underlining, and bulleted lists
to draw readers’ attention to certain words and to help important information
stand out. Also, the use of graphics such as tables, graphs, pictures, and
diagrams helps the audience grasp complex information quickly.
Isabel was recently assigned as Lead Technical Communicator on a team
that is developing a high-profile software known as SpeedQuest. She is
responsible for coordinating communication between the programming
team and the marketing team. Because this position is likely to result in a
promotion and career advancement, Isabel is eager to do a good job.
One evening Isabel overhears the lead computer programmer tell the project
manager that SpeedQuest is not as advanced as advertised in the company’s
marketing materials. The programmer recommends delaying the launch
date, but the project manager ignores the suggestion, deciding to issue a
second release after the product is complete.
The next day in the meeting to discuss the marketing materials, Isabel
struggles to decide whether she should list in the brochures the SpeedQuest
features that do not work yet. She knows that the features would help sales
of SpeedQuest. On the other hand, she knows that if she tells the truth and
decides not to publish information about the features, she may not get the
promotion she is counting on. What should Isabel do?
Think Critically
What resources might Isabel use to better understand and resolve this situation?
Communication
Dilemma
14 | Chapter 1
More than the research paper or personal essay, the technical document
relies on special features. Technical documents require more visual effort
if they are to grab and hold the readers’ attention. Writers use some of the
following special features to make their documents more effective for the
audience:
Font size and style—what size is readable for the targeted audience? how
◾
many styles are appropriate?
Numbered and/or bulleted lists—what kind of bullets?
◾
Columns—one, two, three, or more?
◾
Color—which colors? how much color?
◾
Graphs and tables—one-, two-, or three-dimensional? horizontal or
◾
vertical? number of columns? color or no color?
Letterhead and logo—size? location? middle, upper left or right, or side?
◾
Photos and drawings—subject? style? black and white or color?
◾
Sidebars—what information to highlight? where to place?
◾
Clip art—what purpose? to add humor, to set a tone, or to celebrate a
◾
season?
Technical writers face a double challenge. They not only must write with
clear, accurate, and specifi c words, but also must design the document to
look inviting and attractive. Therefore, technical writers are production
artists—writing with precision to locate the best word and sentence structure
for the message and designing pages that combine a professional image with
a user-friendly approach. To do so, technical writers use a tool of their trade:
desktop publishing software. The software allows technical writers to craft
documents that meet their readers’ needs.
Technical communicators can face thorny issues when they provide a
service for a company or an organization that may expect results that the
technical writer finds questionable or problematic. For instance, a technical
writer working for Energy Battery Company may be asked to write a press
release announcing the plant’s unexpected two-week shutdown, but is told
not to include information about the chemical spill that could have leaked
into the local estuary. The technical writer may be torn between meeting
management’s expectations (and moving up the corporate ladder) and
serving the public good. Writers need to be thoroughly aware of their ethics
and explore all possible actions and outcomes in such situations.
Think Critically
How do an ethical dilemma and a legal dilemma differ?
Focus on
Ethics
What Is Technical Writing? | 15
HOW TECHNICAL WRITING COMPARES
TO OTHER WRITING
Technical writing has much in common with the academic writing you have
experienced in school. Technical writing also shares aspects of the literature
you have read. The differences, however, set technical writing apart from
other writing that is familiar to you.
Technical Writing and Academic Writing
Academic writing (for example, personal essays, research papers, analyses,
and arguments) is the expository and persuasive writing (writing to
convince others) done in academic circles. It must be unifi ed, coherent,
and well organized. Technical writing also must be unifi ed, coherent, and
well organized. Style and standard usage (the spoken and written English
expected in business communication) are important in academic and
technical writing. Both types of writing rely on a process of thinking and
writing that takes place over a few hours, a few days, or several weeks. The
purpose is often the same—to inform or persuade.
The difference between academic writing and technical writing is in
the presentation, audience, and approach. Academic writing includes
paragraphs—usually an introductory paragraph, paragraphs that develop
a thesis (a statement of purpose), and a concluding paragraph. Academic
writing is written for an academic audience—an instructor, classmates, or a
group of interested scholars.
The purpose of academic writing is to expand on an idea or make
observations about human experience. For example, Francis Bacon’s essay
entitled “On Reading” elaborates on the benefi ts of reading. In “Two Views
of the Mississippi,” Mark Twain observes that while a close study of the
river is necessary to reveal its dangers, that study also takes away the river’s
mystery.
Technical writing also includes paragraphs. It, too, often begins with an
introduction and closes with a conclusion. But technical writing (with its
headings, itemized lists, boldfaced type, and graphics) looks different from
academic writing. Technical writing is written for a specifi c audience. The
subject is generally technical, business-related, or scientifi cally oriented.
Generally, there is less fl exibility in the subject matter, style, and tone. Often
the intent is to clarify and consolidate rather than expand.
STOP AND THINK
Drawing from the activities in this section’s Warm Up, write your own
definition of technical writing. Make sure you incorporate concepts from
this section, such as subject, organization, audience, style, tone, and
special features.
From your experience with
writing, what characteristics
does good writing share? In
other words, how would you
describe good writing?
Warm Up
16 | Chapter 1
Technical Writing and Imaginative Writing
Imaginative writing also adheres to principles of unity,
coherence, and standard usage. Imaginative writers let their
ideas emerge and develop over time. However, compared to
technical and academic writing, imaginative writing is less
academic and more artistic and creative.
Imaginative writing includes novels, short stories, drama, and
poetry whose situations grow out of fantasy or imagination.
Events and people are fi ctional, although the themes may
reveal universal truths. Imaginative writing is often ambiguous,
meaning that more than one interpretation is possible and
describing writing that means different things to different
people. Imaginative writing also requires the reader to draw
inferences, which are judgments about the reading that the
writer does not make for the reader.
Technical writing should be unambiguous and direct. A work
of literature may be rich because it means different things to
different readers. A reader might ponder the different meanings
of the old man’s voyage in Hemingway’s The Old Man and the
Sea, but W. Earl Britton says “that the primary, though not the
sole, characteristic of technical and scientifi c writing lies in the
effort of the author to convey one and only one meaning in
what he says” (114).
The meaning of a sentence in technical writing must be
clear. “Turn there,” Mr. Ybarra said, and his daughter turned
left when he meant for her to turn right. The word there can have
different meanings to different people. However, “Turn right at
Nottingham Road, the next paved road,” has only one meaning.
Imaginative writing such as Emily Dickinson’s “Because I could not stop for
Death—He kindly stopped for me” often requires you to make inferences.
You do not expect to make inferences about technical writing. If the poet’s
doctor gave the following instructions to a nurse, what would happen?
Because I couldn’t remember the name of Ms. Dickinson’s medication, would
you kindly call the pharmacy and ask for the bottle that holds the blue and
red pills? Poor Ms. Dickinson. She’d fi nd more comfort in the words of her
poem than in the advice of her doctor.
STOP AND THINK
Write a paragraph comparing technical writing to academic and imaginative
writing.
While many employees who write
technical documents are experts in
areas other than communications,
some people are hired solely as
technical writers. The U.S. Department
of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
reports that the demand and salaries
for writers and editors is likely to
increase: “Opportunities should be best
for technical writers and those with
training in a specialized ﬁ eld. Demand
for technical writers and writers with
expertise in areas such as law, medicine,
or economics is expected to increase
because of the continuing expansion of
scientiﬁ c and technical information and
the need to communicate it to others.”
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 1
and ﬁ nd the education, range of
employment opportunities, and salaries
for technical writers. Write an ad for a
technical writer based on your ﬁ ndings.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
What Is Technical Writing? | 17
Chapter 1
Review
Checklist
Can I defi ne technical writing?
◾
Can I list the characteristics of technical writing?
◾
Can I give examples of technical writing in the workplace?
◾
Can I explain how technical writing differs from academic and imaginative
◾
writing?
Can I identify ways in which technical writing is similar to academic
◾
writing?
SUMMARY
1. You have probably used technical writing if you have given someone
directions, written a recipe, explained closing procedures at work, or
done many other everyday activities.
2. Technical communication, whether a written document or an oral
presentation, presents technical information with a specifi c purpose
and audience and a clear, straightforward approach.
3. Required in all professions, technical writing is critical in the
workplace.
4. Technical writing exhibits the following characteristics:
Subject: technical, factual
◾
Audience: carefully considered, targeted
◾
Organization: predictable, apparent
◾
Style: concise, direct, specialized vocabulary
◾
Tone: objective, businesslike
◾
Special features: visual elements
◾
5. Technical writing differs from academic writing in its presentation,
approach to subject matter, and audience and from imaginative
writing in its “one-meaning-and-one-meaning-only” presentation.
18 | Chapter 1
Build Your Foundation
1. What characteristics does technical writing share with other types of writing?
2. Which of these subjects would most likely be written about in a
technical style? Which of these subjects would most likely be written
about in an academic style?
a sunset
homelessness
a first car
electric circuits
graduation
a wedding
a computer screen
a close friend
flowers
3. Which of the following statements would you expect to come from
a technical writing document? Which would come from imaginative
literature? How can you tell? What are your clues?
a. My memory of her will never fade. She brought music into my life.
b. There are two types of computer random-access memory (RAM):
static RAM and dynamic RAM.
c. Most intriguing is the adaptation of Corvette Z52 calipers to the car.
d. The mist peeked over the marshland.
e. Once upon a time there was a princess who ruled a vast country.
f. The video output stage simply provides the voltage amplifi cation and
driving power for the cathode-ray tube and accepts the vertical and
horizontal blanking signals.
4. In a role you have held, such as chairperson of an organization
or a committee, employee, or team member, describe the kinds of
communication required of you in that role. Would you describe the
communication you did as technical communication? Why or why not?
5. Find a piece of technical writing (or another kind of writing) that you
think is ineffective. Write a brief analysis of the writing, focusing on the
characteristics that make it ineffective. Then analyze a piece of writing
that you believe is effective. Compare the two pieces of writing for
subject, audience, organization, style, tone, and special features.
6. Read each statement and identify the audience you think the writer is
targeting.
a. As instructed by the dentist, oxygenate the patient 5 minutes for every
15 minutes of nitrous oxide exposure to prevent diffusion hypoxia.
b. Here at the offi ce when nitrous oxide is used, the oxygen administered with
it prevents headaches, grogginess, nausea, and that “hung-over” feeling.
c. Make no bones about it—City Dogs is a gentle, funny movie that your
entire family will enjoy!
d. When booking train reservations in Spain, be aware that INTERCITY
is the standard daytime service, while TALGOS offers more amenities
and is more expensive.
e. Come and see Big Bear at Ayden Centre on Saturday morning. Have
your picture taken with him and take home one of the balloon
animals he makes for you.
7. Examine the information found on a box or can of your favorite packaged
food or beverage. In particular, notice the nutrition information. Write
an explanation of why the information on the package is considered
technical communication.
What Is Technical Writing? | 19
Your Turn
8. What skills do you need to improve your technical writing? How can you
acquire those skills?
9. Conduct an Internet search for the keywords technical writing, technical
editing, and technical communication. Write a summary of your fi ndings
and share your summary with the class.
10. Find an article in a professional journal, either in print or online. Read the
article to understand the organizational strategy used. Because obvious
organization is one of the characteristics of technical communication,
analyze the article to determine whether its organization is obvious and
is easy for readers to follow. Write a report of your fi ndings and attach a
copy of the article.
11. Collect brochures or pamphlets from a local government agency such as
the health department or parks and recreation offi ce. Use the headings
and subheadings to create an outline. Then compare the outline you have
created to the overall message of the document. Write a brief description of
how effectively (or ineffectively) the system of headings and subheadings
provides emphasis for important information in the document.
12. Read an article in your favorite magazine or textbook. Choose special features
of technical writing. How do those features make the writing easy to read?
13. Write a short report describing the writing skills required in three of the
following careers. You may need to research some of the job titles so you
know the kinds of writing the jobs require. Or choose three careers that
interest you and write a short report describing the writing skills that
those careers require.
physical therapist
computer network administrator
medical assistant
audiologist
agricultural extension agent
veterinary care aide
research scientist
food service manager
electrical technician
real estate broker
construction project manager
reference librarian
14. Search the Internet for an example of technical writing written by
someone who holds a job you might like to have someday. Explain the
purpose of the example and the way the author used technical writing
characteristics to achieve the purpose.
15. Visit the websites of two competing organizations, such as PepsiCo and
The Coca-Cola Company or AT&T and Verizon. Can you determine the
audience that each site targets? Why or why not? Is the site designed to
reach consumers or shareholders or both? How effectively does each site
use the principles of technical communication?
Community Connection
16. Interview a businessperson about his or her technical writing on the job.
What types of documents does this person write most often? Ask if you
may bring a sample of the writing to class.
17. Ask a technician or scientist about his or her technical writing on the
job. Ask what mistake may have been made as a result of imprecise
reporting.
For interview questions, use
the Community Connection
worksheet available at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 1; then click
Data Files.
20 | Chapter 2
Audience and Purpose
WRITE TO LEARN
Think of something you did recently about which you told a number of
people. Consider how your description of the incident changed depending on
whom you talked to. In one page, explain how you described this incident
to (1) authority fi gures (for example, parents, instructors, or employers) and
(2) close friends (who may include sisters and brothers). Did the purpose of
your conversation change when you switched audiences? If so, how? How
did each audience affect your tone, your body language, your choice
of words, and the information you chose to include or omit?
Chapter
Goals
Determine how to meet the needs of a
◾
specific audience and a multiple audience
Plan a document’s purpose, scope, and
◾
medium
Terms
accommodate, p. 26
◾
culture, p. 27
◾
demographics, p. 25
◾
format, p. 37
◾
jargon, p. 26
◾
medium, p. 35
◾
multiple audience, p. 25
◾
primary audience, p. 30
◾
purpose, p. 33
◾
role, p. 27
◾
scope, p. 34
◾
secondary audience, p. 30
◾
specific audience, p. 25
◾
target audience, p. 25
◾
Focus on Audience and Purpose
Read the sample document on the next page and answer these questions:
Who is the audience for this web page?
•
Who is the writer, and what does the writer want the reader to do?
•
What has the writer done to show an understanding of this reader?
•
What kind of information has the writer provided to convince the reader
•
to give blood? Do you think the writer has done a good job? Explain.
What If?
The reader did not have access to the Internet?
•
The reader is a regular donor, but he does not have transportation to the
•
Blood Mobile site?
The reader is a willing fi rst-time donor but wonders if it is all right to give
•
blood on her way home after lifting weights at the gym?
The reader might be willing to donate but is legally blind?
•
Audience and Purpose | 21
Sample Document Written for a Specific Audience
Source: www.givelife.org/donor/top10excuses.asp
Top 10 reasons people don’t give blood
1. I don't like needles / I am scared of needles / I am afraid to give blood
Nearly everyone feels that way at first. However, most donors will tell you that you
feel only a slight initial pinch, and 7–10 minutes later, you are finished and headed
for the canteen. If you take the time (and courage) to make one donation, you’ll
wonder why you ever hesitated.
2. I am too busy
The entire process takes about an hour, and the actual blood donation time is only 7–
10 minutes. If you stop to think that an hour of your time could mean a lifetime for a
premature baby, someone with cancer undergoing chemotherapy, or someone who’s
had an accident, you might decide that you can make the time to give the gift of life.
3. No-one ever asked me . . . I didn't realize my blood was needed
Consider yourself asked! There is simply no other way to supply the blood needs of
hospital patients but for the generous donations of people like you. Every two seconds
someone in America needs blood. More than 38,000 donations are needed every day
in communities across the U.S.
4. I already gave this year
You can give every 56 days. Many donors give 5 times a year!
5. I am afraid I’ll get AIDS
It is not possible to get AIDS by donating blood to the American Red Cross. A new
sterile needle is used for each donor and discarded afterwards.
6. My blood isn’t the right type
Every type of blood is needed daily to meet patient needs. If you have a common
blood type, there are many patients who need it, so it is in high demand. If you have a
less common blood type, there are fewer donors available to give it, so it is in short
supply.
7. I don't have any blood to spare
The average adult body has 10–12 pints of blood. Doctors say that healthy adults may
give regularly because the body quickly replaces the blood you donate.
8. I don’t want to feel weak afterward
Donating blood should not affect adversely a healthy adult because your body has
plenty of blood. You will donate less than one pint, and your body, which constantly
makes new blood, will replace the donated volume within 24 hours. Most people
continue their usual activities after donating.
9. They won’t want my blood (I am too old / I've had an illness)
If you have doubts, check with your physician. The qualified staff on duty at a blood
drive or donor center will also review your medical history with you. There is no
upper age limit to donate blood with the American Red Cross, and a great many
medical conditions do not prevent you from donating blood, or may have done so
only temporarily in the past.
10. I have a rare blood type, so I'll wait until there is a special need
Blood that is rare or special is almost always in short supply. There is a constant need
for these blood types in order to avoid having to recruit specific blood types in a
crisis.
22 | Chapter 2
Writing@Work
Dr. Christopher Blackwell
is Assistant Professor at the
University of Central Florida’s
College of Nursing. He teaches
graduate-level nursing courses,
serves on several faculty committees, and researches health
and social disparities in vulnerable patient populations.
When Christopher needs to persuade fellow faculty members
to make a change to their graduate program, he knows that
he has to do more than simply speak up: He must produce
documented evidence to support his case. “Verbally, I am
able to communicate my opinion to my colleagues, but
when I present effectively written documentation based on
research, my points of view are validated by others.”
Christopher’s gift for speaking comes in handy in the classroom, where he has
a different audience: nursing students. “To help students remember essential
information,” he says, “I use real clinical scenarios that I have experienced and
also tell jokes. Students appreciate these types of communication.” In addition
to instructive anecdotes and humor, Christopher believes that body language,
or nonverbal cues, are important to effective classroom communication.
While he teaches for a student audience, he researches and publishes writing
for a professional scholarly audience. Christopher strongly believes that “the one
thing that is most essential when preparing formal writing is focus.” To focus his
writing for an academic audience, Christopher writes an article’s abstract—or a
summary of the article—first and then uses this synopsis as an outline for the
longer piece.
Think Critically
1. The profile describes three types of communication in which Christopher
engages. What are they? How are they different? How are they similar? How
does Christopher prepare to communicate effectively in each situation?
2. Are you surprised to read that a nursing professor tells jokes in class? Why
does Christopher use humor?
Printed with permission of Dr. Christopher Blackwell
Courtesy of Christopher Blackwell
Audience and Purpose | 23
MEETING THE AUDIENCE’S NEEDS
Audience and reader are nearly interchangeable terms. As technical
communication expands to include multimedia presentations, audience has
a broader meaning. Sometimes the audience is not a reader, but a listener
or an observer. On the Web, the reader also is an active participant. In any
case, technical writers must know who the members of their audience are
and what those readers need or want to know.
In the sample document on page 21, the writer knows who the audience is—
potential blood donors. The focus is on the reader, and the writing shows an
understanding of the reader’s point of view. The Red Cross knows this reader
well, obviously having heard these reasons many times. After identifying this
audience, the writer systematically counters any objections with objective,
precise, factual information.
Technical writing is written
for both internal and external
audiences. When Roweena,
a dispatcher, writes a memo
announcing pay increases to the
police offi cers in her district,
she is writing to the members
of her organization—an internal
audience. The author of “Top
10 reasons people don’t give
blood” is writing for an external
audience—people outside the
organization.
In technical writing, the writer
is transparent. A technical
writer is like a member of
a stage crew, a behind-the-
scenes operator, whose
primary obligation is to
satisfy the audience’s need for
information. In a good play, the
audience is barely aware of the
crew at work who is moving
sets and producing sound on
cue, but without the crew,
the show would not go on. Similarly, good writers produce work without
drawing attention to their role.
Types of Audiences
You may write a poem or short story without the intention of sharing it
with anyone. However, technical writing implies an audience, often a very
specifi c audience, but sometimes a more varied audience. Your readers may
be customers, coworkers, managers, subordinates, or the general public.
Usually, your relationship to your readers determines how you write your
document—the tone you use, the formality of the language, and its medium.
Suppose your younger
brother or sister did
something that made you
unhappy. How would you
talk to your brother or sister
about the problem? Now
suppose the person who
oﬀ ended you was a coworker.
How would your audience
aﬀ ect what you say?
Warm Up
© Jeff Greenberg/ The Image Works
24 | Chapter 2
A memo to the chief executive offi cer (CEO), for example,
would be more formal than a memo to a coworker.
As you are planning your document, consider whether your
readers fall into one of these categories:
Lay reader:
◾
a general reader without expert knowledge but with
an interest in a subject. Readers of newspapers and magazines
such as Psychology Today and Popular Science are lay readers.
Technician:
◾
a person with skilled knowledge in an area who
implements the ideas or plans of the expert. Technicians, like
lathe operators and network administrators, operate equipment,
repair machinery, and train others. They read manuals,
schematics, blueprints, and technical reports.
Expert:
◾
an authority in a particular fi eld who is highly skilled
and professional, perhaps with an advanced degree. Experts
design equipment, conduct research, and create new products.
Experts such as medical doctors and engineers contribute
to professional journals such as the Journal of the American
Medical Association and the Journal of Applied Physics,
respectively, and they read professional journals.
Manager:
◾
a person who organizes personnel and is responsible
for the day-to-day operations as well as long-range planning.
Upper-level managers are leaders responsible for creating a
vision and moving the organization forward. Depending on their
level of expert knowledge, managers may read feasibility reports, research
reports, fi nancial reports, or professional articles.
A reader can fall into more than one category. Thinking through the
categories will help you make decisions about how best to communicate
with your audience.
Meeting the Needs of a Specific Audience
Do you understand the message below? It is written in Morse code—letters
as a series of dots and dashes transmitted as sounds, lights, or electrical
pulses. Many people have no need to know Morse code. They are not the
target audience. Therefore, the message fails to communicate.
–.– –. ––– .––
–.–– ––– ..– .–.
.– ..– –.. .. . –. –.–. .
A Navy radio operator during World War I would have understood this code.
The operator’s audience shared a common mission: to receive important
military messages over long distances. In short, the Navy radio operator used
Morse code to meet the highly specifi c needs of a particular audience.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
The BBC, the British Broadcasting Corporation,
has two versions of the news on its website,
a UK (United Kingdom) version and an
international version. Users logging on are
automatically taken to the broadcast deemed
most relevant based on their geographic
locations. Thus, a person from the Middle East
will see news from the Middle East; a person
from South Asia will see news from South
Asia. Other news websites including VOA,
Voice of America, and Google News oﬀ er
news in similar formats. As you can see, these
organizations have designed websites to reach
out to many diﬀ erent audiences.
Think Critically
How might news about an event reported by
India be diﬀ erent from the news about the
same event reported by the United States?
Audience and Purpose | 25
The Navy operator is the target audience, the audience for which the
message is written, the audience to which the writer is writing by using
language this reader will understand.
To communicate successfully,
you must speak the “language”
of your audience. Failure to speak
in terms that your reader expects
creates a barrier that prevents
communication, much the same
way the Morse code keeps you
from understanding its message.
But to speak the language, you
must know who the audience is.
Your audience may be a specifi c
audience (a single person or a
group whose point of view is the
same), or your audience may be a
multiple audience (readers whose
points of view differ). Once you
know your audience, you can plan
ways to appeal to your reader(s).
To help you target the needs of a
specifi c group, gather information
about the demographics of the
group—information such as the
age, sex, income, and educational
level of your group. If you are planning to advertise a new day care center,
for example, your target audience would be working parents with young
children. You might look at census data to fi nd out where to advertise your
new center. If you are designing a website for retirees, look into what retirees
are interested in—for example, health care, recreational activities, and travel.
As a writer, the relationship with your readers is also important. Are
they customers, managers, peers, or subordinates? Your relationship will
determine how you write your document—the tone you use, the formality
of your document, and its medium.
The reader’s needs determine what kind of information the writer supplies.
When your manager needs to know the cost of hiring an administrative
assistant, you provide cost. When the maintenance crew wants an e-mail
that provides information about mosquito repellent, you research repellents
and send the crew members an e-mail with your information. When the
audience is unsure of its needs, the writer helps the audience think through
the communication situation.
In technical writing, one rule dominates: The needs and wants of your
audience dictate every decision you make as a writer. The writer uses a
skill to provide a valuable service. Think of it this way: The writer is the
server, and the audience is the person ordering from the menu. If the person
ordering requests a salad with no tomatoes and Italian dressing on the side,
the server obliges!
Digital Vision/Getty Images
26 | Chapter 2
Analyze Your Target Audience
Sometimes your audience is a specifi c person or group with a common
interest. After you identify the readers in your target audience, consider
how their knowledge level, roles, interests, cultural background, and
personalities may infl uence what you write and how you write it. Age,
experience, attitude, organizational distance, income, and politics may
affect the language you choose to communicate successfully. Targeting the
special needs of a specifi c audience requires a writer to consider several
factors at once. Understanding your audience’s knowledge level, role,
interests, cultural background, and personality is the fi rst step to successful
communication.
Attending to the needs and wants of your audience is much like attending
to a special guest in your home. You are aware of this person’s presence,
and you make every effort to make this person feel welcomed. For example,
a Spanish-speaking exchange student from Chile spoke English moderately
well and enjoyed playing the guitar. His American host family attended to
his needs and wants by defi ning unfamiliar words and borrowing a guitar
for him to play. Just as the host family gave special consideration to the
Chilean student, you should consider your audience by making every effort
to accommodate (adjust to, make concessions for) your audience’s needs
and wants.
Knowledge Level
What people know and how well they know it varies widely
from one person to the next. As such, knowledge level can be
high, low, or moderate. It can be technical or nontechnical.
Ask yourself what your readers know or do not know about
your subject. If you tell them what they already know, you
risk wasting their time (not to mention yours). Yet if you omit
something they need to know, you have not done your job.
For example, the knowledge level of Josh’s parents prevented
them from understanding a medical report. After 2-year-old Josh
fell down a fl ight of stairs at home, his distraught parents took
him to the emergency room. Josh’s emergency room report read
as follows: “The child suffered from contusions and lacerations.”
Contusions and lacerations are familiar terms to doctors and
nurses. For Josh’s parents, however, the medical jargon (the
highly specialized language of a discipline or technical fi eld)
did not communicate as effectively as these everyday terms that
are familiar to most parents: The child suffered from cuts and
bruises. The medical jargon was confusing, and it made Josh’s
fall seem worse than it really was.
Experience, age, and expertise can affect how much someone
knows. Josh’s parents lacked the experience and background of a
doctor or nurse. And because of his age, Josh did not understand
medical terms. The technician who X-rayed Josh’s fi nger knew
how to position it to get the best picture but lacked the expert
knowledge of the engineer who designed the machine.
Cyborlink is a website that provides
tips on how to conduct business
in 122 countries according to each
culture’s norms. Included in this site is
information on what to wear; how to
greet people; when and how to present
gifts; and how, in general, people should
mind their manners when conducting
business overseas.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 2
and ﬁ nd Hofstede’s Dimension of
Culture Scales. How does the United
States rank on the scale? Compare
your ﬁ nding for the United States to
those of two other countries. Bring your
ﬁ ndings to class for a discussion of the
similarities and diﬀ erences.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Audience and Purpose | 27
Role
Consider your reader’s role or
his or her area of responsibility
before you begin writing. A
role is the function or job that
someone performs at work.
Role or job title affects not only
knowledge level, but also the
information your reader thinks
is important.
Understand your reader’s
role and accommodate it. An
accountant is concerned about
her company’s fi nances. If you
write a memo to the accounting
offi ce about a planned purchase,
you should accommodate the
accountant’s role by including
information about cost. The technician who reads the same memo may be
more interested in how to operate equipment being purchased, having little
concern about the cost. For the technician, you should include suffi cient
information about the technical aspects of the equipment.
Interest
When your readers are interested in your subject, they read with greater
enthusiasm. Where you fi nd common interest, take advantage of it. Where
there is none, try to create it. Some readers, however, will never be interested
in your subject. Accept those readers’ lack of interest and focus on giving
them the information they need.
Interest can be affected by age, experience, cultural background, and role.
Your interests now are different from what they were ten years ago because
you have a wider range of experiences. The camping and fi shing trips you
enjoyed as a child may have been replaced by long motor trips and concerts
as a young adult. If everyone in your family enjoys eating black beans and
rice, you may have a taste for those foods because of your background. Right
now your role is to be a student. When you join the workforce, your interests
will be determined in part by your professional role.
Cultural Background
Culture—the special beliefs, customs, and values specifi c to a particular
group of people or to a particular region—affects what an audience considers
to be proper behavior. Many beliefs regarding human relations are affected
by an individual’s cultural background. By failing to consider someone’s
cultural background, you risk offending your reader and creating barriers in
the communication process. Your goal is to open the lines of communication
and reach out to all of your readers.
© Yuri Arcurs, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
28 | Chapter 2
In the United States, regional cultural differences affect communication.
In the South, many parents insist that their children say, “Yes, ma’am,”
“No, ma’am,” “Yes, sir,” and “No, sir” to their elders as a sign of respect
and proper etiquette. Other regions of the country do not rely as heavily
on these endearments. While “Yes, ma’am” and “Yes, sir” are expected as
polite gestures in one region of the country, the expressions may sound out
of place—even offensive—in another region. Some people begin a telephone
conversation with small talk, asking how the person or his or her family is,
as a prelude to conducting business. Yet other people consider such small
talk to be too personal or a waste of time.
U.S. businesses are becoming increasingly global. American-based
businesses have interests abroad in countries such as Mexico, Argentina,
Turkey, and India. Many documents are read by audiences outside the
United States whose cultural differences affect communication. Where
American business personnel perceive directness as a sign of open and
honest business dealings, other cultures consider this approach brash
and insensitive. Where American business relies heavily on written
agreements (“put it in writing” and “read the fi ne print”), other cultures
trust oral communication. Understanding these differences is imperative
to accommodating your audience’s cultural background.
Personality
Personality can be affected by culture, heredity, age, experience, and role.
Also, someone’s personality can shape his or her work habits. A legal
researcher who prefers to work alone may appreciate receiving instructions
via e-mail and therefore enjoys reading her e-mail. Someone who prefers
working in a group may want to receive oral instructions in a meeting so
he can share his reaction with others. For him, e-mail may be a nuisance.
When communicating, you may not know your readers well enough to
make judgments about their personalities. But if you do, you can tailor your
communication style appropriately.
Mayur is a successful manager. Part of his success comes from analyzing
the personalities of his subordinates and supervisors. He knows that his
supervisor likes to make decisions based on facts. When Mayur talks to her,
he is direct and presents only the facts. When Mayur writes to her, his tone
is objective and he includes ample statistical data. In fact, the company’s
new medical plan is the result of Mayur’s detailed proposal. Mayur’s line
manager, on the other hand, is laid-back and wants to know only the bottom
line. Memos to him are short, infrequent, and friendly. The line manager is
not interested in details, prefers a visit to a memo, and is hurt if the tone is
too formal. Mayur has a good relationship with this line manager, who might
otherwise be suspicious of a supervisor.
Before you begin to write a technical document, analyze your audience to
determine their special needs. Use the questions in Table 2.1 to help you
decide what is important to remember about your reader(s). When you
have answered the questions, consider the single most important thing to
remember about your audience. Then follow the suggestions in the second
column for adjusting to your audience’s needs.
Audience and Purpose | 29
ASK THESE QUESTIONS
MAKE THESE ACCOMMODATIONS
Knowledge Level
What does my reader already know
about the topic?
Is my reader an expert, a technician, or a
lay reader?
What does my reader need to know?
What does my reader want to know?
Add particular knowledge that your
audience does not have. Leave out or
quickly summarize knowledge your
audience already has. Decide how much
technical language to include. Use infor-
mal definitions or a glossary if necessary.
Present complex information visually.
Interests
How strong is my reader’s interest in my
topic?
Are my reader’s priorities different from
mine or the same as mine?
Is my reader likely to agree with my
point of view?
Appeal to known interests or try to cre-
ate interest. Express agreement with and
understanding of a point of view when
possible. Provide evidence to help sway
others to your point of view.
Role
Is my reader’s role
-to make decisions or implement a plan?
- to operate equipment, encode data,
train others?
-to create or design or invent?
Is my communication going to manage-
ment, to a peer, or to a supervisee?
Include knowledge the role requires—
planning parameters for managers,
technical details for technicians. Write
different sections for different roles. Be
diplomatic with management, courte-
ous yet straightforward with a peer, and
respectful and direct with someone you
supervise.
Cultural Background
What is my reader’s cultural
background?
What are my reader’s beliefs?
Are my reader’s beliefs different from
mine or the same as mine?
Understand how culture affects some-
one’s beliefs and decisions. Learn about
the cultural background of your audi-
ence and adhere to the cultural norms of
that audience as much as possible.
Personality
What kind of personality does my reader
have?
Is my reader analytical, quiet, or
outgoing?
Does my reader prefer having details or
seeing the big picture?
Adjust tone and medium to personality.
Provide facts, order, and evidence for the
analytically minded; a personal touch for
facilitators; and ideas and the overall
picture for creative thinkers.
Table 2.1
After studying Table 2.1,
complete the Accommodating
Your Audience’s Needs
worksheet available at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 2; then click
Data Files.
30 | Chapter 2
Meeting the Needs of a Multiple Audience
Shakespeare was arguably the greatest writer who ever lived. His success
depended on his wit, knowledge of theater, and understanding of his
audience. As a businessperson, Shakespeare knew that he had to please
England’s royal family as well as the peasants who came to see his plays. He
had to appeal to young and old, to men and women, to the educated and the
uneducated. In the sixteenth century, Shakespeare wrote successfully to a
multiple audience, an audience made up of multiple interests, with members
whose needs and wants sometimes confl icted with one another.
Today technical writers face a similar challenge writing to
an audience that can include executives, managers, and
administrative assistants. In his day, Shakespeare was clever—he
wrote different parts of the same play for different people.
Today his “different parts for different folks” strategy is used by
technical writers too. But technical writers go one step further.
They “label” the parts with headings, short titles preceding
sections of the document to alert readers to the information
written for them.
Another strategy for meeting the diverse needs of a multiple
audience is to determine who comes fi rst—whose needs are
most important. To decide what data to focus on as you write,
divide your audience into two groups: primary audience and
secondary audience. Think of the primary audience as readers
or listeners to whom you are responsible fi rst and the secondary audience as
readers or listeners to whom you are responsible after having met the needs
of the primary audience. Both audiences are important, but as a writer, you
must organize your tasks according to some kind of priority.
Walsh Plastics is considering building a plant in Thailand. Suppose you
are the writer of the feasibility report analyzing the move for the company.
Walsh’s executives and the company lawyer must decide whether to open
a factory in a foreign country. They constitute the primary audience. The
architect who will design the new plant, the sales representatives who will
move, and the managers who will train new workers make up the secondary
audience. How will you address each audience’s needs and wants?
The following criteria may help you determine who the primary and
secondary audiences are for your writing projects.
PRIMARY AUDIENCE
SECONDARY AUDIENCE
Asked for or authorized the
◾
writing of the document
Will make decisions based on the
◾
information in the document
Will request or take action based
◾
on information in the document
Will likely read the entire
◾
document
Will be affected by the document
◾
in some way
Is interested in the decisions
◾
made or the information in the
document
May use some information for
◾
a purpose different from the
document’s purpose
May read selected portions
◾
TYPICAL READER
A person or group of people who want or
need speciﬁ c information.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Analyzing the audience’s needs and provid-
ing information in the best possible way
for the audience to understand.
Audience and Purpose | 31
Magdalena, a computer programmer, faced the challenging task of writing
a proposal for the inventory management program of a local school system.
The primary audience, the director, contracted services with Magdalena,
specifi ed what the program needed to do, and decided who would be
trained to use the program. The secondary audience included assistants who
would key data, the programmer who would modify the program, and the
superintendent who would confi rm that the programmer had fulfi lled his or
her contract terms.
Magdalena’s audience ranged from readers with little knowledge of
programming to readers with extensive knowledge of programming. To
accommodate all of their needs, she wrote different parts of the report
for different people. Table 2.2 on the next page reveals the adjustments
Magdalena made to accommodate the needs of the multiple audience.
Chapter 13 will cover long reports with different headings that are written to
accommodate a multiple audience.
Sometimes, though, when a document is short, you can simply revise it
for each audience and send it separately. For example, an e-mail from the
director of information systems to the network administrators telling them to
bring down the network Friday afternoon for routine maintenance specifi ed
what the network staff should do. The director reminded the network
administrators that users would be notifi ed to log off by noon.
As a writer, to avoid biased language, you must be aware of stereotypes
in your writing. Sometimes the stereotype is so engrained in the culture
that you do not realize you are using biased language. You probably know
that you should avoid sexist language in your writing (referring to men
and women differently), but stereotypes include more than gender. People
also can be stereotyped because of race, sexual orientation, age, physical or
mental abilities, religion, ethnicity, and weight.
In your writing, strive to present everyone as being equal. There are several
ways to do this. First, avoid sexist language by referring to men and women
the same way. For example, do not assume that all doctors are men and that
all nurses are women. Avoid using examples that reinforce stereotypes.
Do not mention a person’s physical characteristics if they are not relevant. If
you would not say, “Our new software developer is Max, a smart white man
without disabilities,” then do not say, “Our new software developer is Sandra,
a smart white woman with physical disabilities.”
Sometimes you are not aware of the biased language. If you are not sure
whether you have used stereotypes in your writing, ask another person to
look over the document.
Think Critically
What are the possible consequences of stereotyping people?
Focus on
Ethics
32 | Chapter 2
Before the director sent the e-mail to users, she revised the message.
Instead of specifying the work to be done, she asked users to log off by
noon, announced that the maintenance was routine, and thanked them for
their cooperation and patience. The reminder of the network outage in the
bimonthly newsletter was even briefer. By the time she fi nished, she had
revised her message for three different audiences.
Writing to a multiple audience, then, requires careful analysis of each
possible audience member followed by a workable plan. Writing “different
parts for different folks,” focusing on the needs of the primary audience, and
rewriting short documents are all strategies available to the technical writer.
Remember, too, that an audience that you did not consider could read your
document. Therefore, you must anticipate every possible audience member
and write accordingly.
READER’S ROLES AND NEEDS
MAGDALENA’S ADJUSTMENT
TO READER
As the approver, the superintendent
needs to know whether the money
spent on the programmer’s services
was responsibly invested and whether
the terms of the contract have been
completed.
Magdalena writes a cover memo briefly
summarizing the report, describing the
program, and outlining advantages to
the school system. She uses little or no
technical language, carefully defining
any technical terms.
As the decision maker and manager, the
director needs an overview of the pro-
gram to see whether the specifications
agreed upon have been met and to re-
ceive a demonstration of the product.
Magdalena writes the Executive Sum-
mary, which presents the most important
information in the report. She includes
some technical language and gives a
formal demonstration of the program.
Despite varied roles, all of the readers
need to understand the purpose of the
manual and those parts that will help
each of them.
In the Introduction, Magdalena explains
the purpose of the proposal and its or-
ganization. She uses little or no technical
language.
As the technician, the programmer needs
to understand the program structure, to
know how best to extend the functional-
ity of the program, and to know how
users interface with the program.
Magdalena documents her program-
ming with UML diagrams and places
this information in the Appendix. She
invites the programmer to the training
session for assistants.
As end users, the administrative assis-
tants need to understand how to key,
manipulate, and find data as quickly as
possible.
Magdalena writes Procedures that explain
how to use the program. She uses short
commands, occasional explanations,
and screen shots. She then follows up
with a training session on how to use the
program.
Table 2.2
Audience and Purpose | 33
PLANNING YOUR DOCUMENT’S PURPOSE,
SCOPE, AND MEDIUM
Understanding who your audience is and what they need and want is an
important part of your job as a writer. However, you have other decisions to
make before you are ready to write. Early in the writing process, determine
the purpose of your document, its scope, and the medium you will use.
Purpose
Purpose is defi ned as a specifi c end or outcome to be obtained. It is
what a writer wants a reader to do after reading a document. In technical
writing, the purpose is to inform or persuade. Quite often the purpose is
both. Because much technical writing is intended to persuade, you need to
consider your topic from the readers’ points of view. How will your readers
react to the information you provide? For them, is the information good
or bad news? With whom or what are you competing for your readers’
attention? Is there a time limit for responding? Are your readers required to
read your document? In other words, how hard must you work to get and
keep your readers’ attention? You should address these and other concerns as
you think about the purpose of your document.
To determine the specifi c purpose of your writing assignment, ask yourself a
couple of basic questions:
What do I want to inform my readers about?
◾
What do I want to persuade or convince them of?
◾
What do I want to happen as a result of this document?
◾
To determine the purpose of your writing, ask additional questions to
fi gure out what you want to happen as a result of the document. What do
you want your readers to do? What do you want them to know, to buy, to
believe, to give? What would you like them to learn to do or change their
minds about? Would you like them to stop doing something or start doing
something? When you answer those questions, you will know the purpose of
your document.
A statement of purpose may be to inform citizens of the latest employment
trends or to convince the public to purchase smoke alarms. The persuasive
purpose also implies providing information. Thus, a purpose to persuade
becomes a purpose to inform, too. To convince bank customers to invest
STOP AND THINK
Think of an issue about which you feel passionate—your candidate for
Student Government Association president, pet adoptions, a political issue, or
something else that is important to you. Suppose you had to convince the entire
student body to agree with you. What kinds of adjustments would you make to
appeal to your multiple audiences?
Suppose a local newspaper
reporter had interviewed you
about the incident you wrote
about in the Write to Learn
activity. How does knowing
that the story will appear in
print for a wider audience
aﬀ ect what you say and do
not say? Suppose you were
being interviewed before a
live television audience. What
adjustments would you make
in that instance?
Warm Up
34 | Chapter 2
their money in money market accounts, you also must inform them about
the advantages of such accounts. To convince the public to purchase smoke
alarms requires evidence that smoke alarms save lives.
A statement of purpose on the same topic can vary for each audience.
Consider the new employee evaluation system at Fabre Perfume Industries.
Every employee is evaluated. Therefore, the purpose of the new Employee
Evaluation Manual is to describe the procedure so that all employees
understand how they will be evaluated.
However, because supervisors must conduct the evaluations, they receive the
new Employee Evaluation Manual and the Evaluation Procedures Manual.
The purpose of these manuals is to inform supervisors about the new
procedure for conducting evaluations—how to download forms, where to fi le
them, and what the deadlines are. The topic—new evaluations—is the same,
but supervisors need additional information.
Scope
Once you have a clear, stated purpose, you must decide the following: How
thorough will my coverage be? What information do I include and omit?
Here you use your audience analysis and statement of purpose to make
decisions about the scope of your
writing—the extent of treatment,
activity, or infl uence, that is, what
is and is not included.
Suppose you are writing
instructions telling car owners
how to change a tire. You have
settled on this statement of
purpose: The user should be able
to change a tire after reading
my instructions. If you wonder
whether to include information
about how to select a dependable
tire or how often to rotate tires,
you could review your statement
of purpose and say to yourself,
No, my purpose is to explain
how to change a tire, not to
sell tires or inform users about
proper tire maintenance. If you
are wondering whether to tell
your reader that changing a tire
is not diffi cult and that it is an
important survival skill, you
can ask yourself this question:
Will this information help me
achieve my purpose with this audience? In other words, will it help my
drivers change a tire? The answer is yes. You want to include anything that
motivates your reader to perform your process.
© Vuk Vukmirovic, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
Audience and Purpose | 35
Medium
Finally, you need to choose a medium for delivering your message. Today
technology gives you many options.
The medium is a means by which information is conveyed (for example, a
television commercial). What kind of document will you produce? Will it
be printed? What medium will accomplish your purpose and appeal to your
audience?
Do you need detailed instructions or a quick reference sheet? PowerPoint®
slides or a memo? Do you need to post your document on the Web or send it
as an e-mail attachment? Do you pay to print 20 copies of an 85-page formal
proposal and then mail it, or is it more cost-effective to send 20 CDs that
include an interactive menu, a video of the president, and photographs?
As you are making your decision, ask yourself three questions:
1. Is the medium appropriate for my audience, message, and purpose?
2. Is the time and money required to produce the medium worth the possible
outcome?
3. What media are available to me?
Using the interactive CD complete with video for your 85-page proposal
certainly takes advantage of the features made possible by technology. But
is it appropriate for your audience? Such a presentation could generate more
interest than the printed page. The CD is compact, is easy to produce and
mail, provides many options for retrieval, and may appeal to an audience’s
fascination with technology. Once the CD is loaded, users have more choices.
They can print some or all of the content.
kemie/iStockphoto.com
36 | Chapter 2
However, for someone who just wants to read a document, the CD may seem
too complicated. If the reader is having a problem with his or her computer’s
internal hardware, the video of the president will not matter. Producing
the CD may take extra time and greater skill, perhaps requiring the help
of colleagues. You must ask yourself whether the possible outcome of this
project is worth the extra effort. The extra time and effort may be worthwhile
if you are hoping to land a major account using a media display. But if your
audience is not the fi nancial player you need, perhaps you are better off with
the 85 printed pages or carefully chosen excerpts.
To help you decide what medium is appropriate, fi nd out what kind of media
are typically used in your organization. Your local department of social
services may use e-mail for routine communication and interoffi ce mail
for important memos and intake reports. The state agency, however, may
expect e-mail attachments for monthly participation reports. Work at the
national level may best be presented on a website from which PowerPoint®
presentations and brochures can be downloaded and printed.
While many businesses have state-of-the-art computer equipment and fast
Internet connections, some small businesses, such as Air Care’s home heating
and air-conditioning business, may have only a computer, a printer, and a
minimum amount of accounting and word processing software. You, like
Ramon, the owner of Air Care, may fi nd yourself in a fi eld for which you are
well prepared professionally but not as adept with desktop publishing. So
CD-ROMs and web pages are not yet options for everyone. Perhaps well-
designed sales proposals, invoices, and interoffi ce memos meet the needs of
this environment.
Marcus and Sophia are chemists conducting experiments for Wuxi
Pharma ceuticals on how bacteria ward off viral invaders. They just left the
lab to attend a retirement reception for the head of maintenance, a highly
respected and well-liked man responsible for keeping the lab facilities
running during power outages and holidays. Nearly everyone has come
to wish him well. Marcus and Sophia are carrying on a lively conversation,
excited about something that happened in the lab that day. They enter the
reception area and settle into a corner with Uma, the public relations officer,
and Drew, the new webmaster, who is looking uncomfortable in such a
large group. During the presentation, Marcus and Sophia continue to talk
quietly about the CRISPR-based immunity and RNA interference in higher
organisms, ignoring everything that is taking place around them. Marcus
sees Uma looking at him with a puzzled look.
Think Critically
Why do you think Uma looks puzzled? What advice would you give to Marcus
and Sophia?
Communication
Dilemma
Audience and Purpose | 37
The format of your medium deals with the details of the document’s
arrangement: the type of document, its length, the preferred style manual, and
its organization. Just as your English instructor may prefer that your essays be
written a particular way, your employer also may prefer that your document
be written a certain way. Your English instructor may require papers to be
keyed and double-spaced using the guidelines from the MLA Handbook
for Writers of Research Papers. Your business or psychology instructor may
require another style guide, such as The Chicago Manual of Style or the
Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association.
An employer may expect you to follow a company style sheet (with
suggested headings and a specifi ed way to present data) and include the
company letterhead (with the logo, address, and slogan). Traditionally,
correspondence outside an organization uses a business letter and
correspondence inside an organization uses a memo. Furthermore, the level
of formality may depend on the subject matter, the audience, and company
standards.
Today electronic formats consisting of e-mail, CD-ROM, online help, and
web-based information are changing traditional ways of communicating.
E-mail is an informal and quick (although not always reliable) way to
communicate and can be used for inside and outside correspondence. Forms
and procedures can be posted on a company’s intranet web server where
templates set up for page layouts ensure design consistency.
Technical writers have many avenues with which to convey information.
Writers’ many choices provide them with creative and innovative solutions
to any communication challenge. On the following page, Table 2.3 shows
some of the choices for a medium once the purpose and scope have been
determined.
© Andrey Arkusha, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
38 | Chapter 2
STOP AND THINK
Analyze an assignment that one of your instructors has given you. What are the
purpose, scope, and medium of the assignment?
PURPOSE
SCOPE
MEDIUM
To convince
reader(s) to . . .
Includes . . .
Does not
include . . .
Possible choices
Prepare for hur-
ricane (residents of
North Carolina)
Emergency sup-
plies, hurricane
routes, shelters,
procedures
Routes/shelters for
states other than
North Carolina
Brochure,
newspaper insert
Operate Brand X
scanner
Information for
scanning photos
and texts
Information for
any brand other
than X; instruc-
tions for how to
repair
Short user’s
manual, online
help
Stop smoking with
nicotine patch
(smoker of ten
years)
Information about
the nicotine patch
Information about
other methods
such as gum,
will power, and
hypnosis
Pharmaceutical
insert for nicotine
patch
Eat nutritious
meals (teens)
Simple, quick
recipes to meet
basic nutritious
needs; foods teens
typically like
Recipes for
heart patients,
diabetics, or aging
population
Spiral-bound
cookbook with CD
Book a vacation
(middle-class
families)
Vacation spots
with group activi-
ties and fun parks;
reduced rates
Vacation spots
with long flights or
honeymoon plans
Magazine article,
brochure, website
Seek information
about financial
aid (high school
seniors)
Information about
parental income
and college plans
Opinions about
fairness of
financial aid
Letter
Table 2.3
Audience and Purpose | 39
Chapter 2
Review
Checklist
Is my audience a specifi c audience or a multiple audience?
◾
Have I analyzed the knowledge level, roles, interests, cultural background,
◾
and personality of my audience?
If I am dealing with a multiple audience, have I selected a strategy for
◾
accommodating their needs and wants?
Have I put into words the purpose of my writing assignment?
◾
Have I determined the scope of my writing assignment by deciding what it
◾
should and should not include?
Have I found an appropriate medium for the writing assignment?
◾
Did I match the audience to the medium?
◾
Have I weighed the costs and time of producing the medium?
◾
Have I considered other available media?
◾
Have I selected an appropriate format for the audience and purpose of the
◾
writing assignment?
Have I checked for stereotypes in my writing?
◾
SUMMARY
1. The audience’s needs and wants should dictate every decision a
writer makes.
2. A specifi c audience is a single reader or a group of readers with
a common purpose. Knowledge level, roles, interests, cultural
background, and personality affect communication with a specifi c
audience.
3. A multiple audience is made up of readers with different points of
view. Analyzing knowledge level, roles, interests, cultural background,
personality, and format are still important when communicating with
a multiple audience.
4. A writer must analyze his or her audience, then decide how to
accommodate the readers’ needs and wants.
5. Early in the writing process, a writer must determine the purpose,
scope, and medium.
40 | Chapter 2
Build Your Foundation
1. To make you more aware of audience, answer the following questions:
Who might be the target audience for these TV shows, networks, or
stations? To what groups of people might they appeal? Why?
Grey’s Anatomy
Monday Night Football
Country Music Television
60 Minutes
Jeopardy
Nick at Nite
American Idol
Lost
The History Channel
2. Consider the following terms. If any are unfamiliar to you, look them
up in a dictionary or ask your family or friends what they mean. Which
audience(s) would understand these terms?
blitz
RAM
curl
sauté
goalie
billabong
dunk
arabesque
rap
compost
angioplasty
starboard
3. Look through the comic section of the Sunday newspaper. Which comic
strips appeal to which audiences? How do you know? For each comic
strip, list the target audience and features that help you identify the
audience.
4. Bring several issues of your favorite magazine to class or visit a library.
Spend 15–20 minutes looking at the table of contents and browsing
through the articles and advertisements. After considering the following
questions, write a few paragraphs analyzing one magazine for audience
and purpose.
a. What is the purpose of the magazine? Who is the intended audience?
b. What are four things the editors of the magazine have done to
accommodate their readers’ needs and wants? In other words, how
have the editors appealed to their readers?
c. Do you like the way the magazine has tried to appeal to its readers?
Why do you believe the appeal is or is not successful?
d. What suggestions do you have for improving the appeal of the
magazine?
e. Do you notice stereotypes in the magazine, particularly in the
advertisements? If so, what are they?
5. Suggest an appropriate audience and medium for the following situations:
a. Nadia wants members of her scuba diving club to know the latest
diving news.
b. Thaddeus is responsible for selling manufactured homes in his
territory.
c. The County Health Department wants to tell the public how to prevent
the fl u.
6. Who are the primary and secondary audiences in the following situations?
a. Aruna Amin, an advertising consultant, has been hired to write a
series of ads to educate young people about the danger of using cell
phones while driving.
b. Lu-yin Chang, a professional technical writer, is working on a catalog
for Pickernel Camping, a national outfi tter of camping supplies.
Audience and Purpose | 41
Your Turn
7. Divide into teams of three or four students. Use the following scenario to
answer items a and b.
Sam, Kaito, and Meg have just started publishing TV Highlights, a weekly
magazine. Sam sells the advertising. Kaito, a graphic designer, is responsible
for the artwork. Kaito’s uncle is the owner. He makes most of the decisions
but often defers to Kaito’s opinions. Meg is the accountant.
Think about the role each person performs in this small company.
How do each person’s responsibilities affect decisions? How does each
person’s role affect how he or she communicates with the other people in
the company? Also, who is the target audience for TV Highlights?
a. Kaito wants a four-color cover for the fi rst issue because he thinks the
fi rst issue should look impressive. Meg, on the other hand, believes
that a four-color cover is too expensive. Sam says that the advertisers
do not care how many colors are on the cover. They want only the
local high school’s blue and red colors to be represented. Meg decides
to write a report to Kaito’s uncle, recommending a two-color cover
for the fi rst few issues. Who is Meg’s audience for the report? What
should she remember about her audience? What kind of information
might she include to convince Kaito’s uncle (and Kaito)? Should she
include information about Sam’s concerns? Why or why not?
b. Franz Bohm, a freelance writer, has written to Kaito, asking what topics
interest the magazine’s readers. The magazine is written for a rural
audience in New England. The average reader is a teen-aged girl. In what
types of articles do you think the readers of TV Highlights are interested?
8. Write a letter to your employer requesting time off for a special event, such
as homecoming or a family vacation. Then switch roles. Write a letter from
the employer to you denying the time off. How are your letters different?
9. Write a letter to the President of the United States about a particular
policy you like (or do not like). Tell a friend what you like (or do not
like) about the same policy. How does your language change?
Community Connection
10. Interview the editor or a news reporter for a local news agency—
newspaper, radio, or television. What are the demographics—the specifi c
breakdown of the members of the audience—by such identifi ers as
age, sex, income, and race? How do the demographics affect the news
reported? How does the writer appeal to this multiple audience? How
does the medium affect the message? Ask about one broadcast or column
in particular. Who is the specifi c audience? What is the purpose, scope, or
medium? Write a one-page Question and Answer (Q&A) of the interview.
11. Interview someone in your area who is from another country or from
another part of the United States. Ask about differences in the culture,
such as food, celebrations, customs, and manners. Research the person’s
culture. Write a list of suggestions that would help an area business
communicate more effectively with this person. For example, what
would a real estate broker need to know to work well with this person?
42 | Chapter 3
Technical Research
WRITE TO LEARN
Think about a time you researched a topic. What was the reason for
your research? What did researching the topic involve? In other words,
how did you conduct the research? Did your research include a survey,
an experiment, or an interview? What did you learn from your research
activities?
Chapter
Goals
Distinguish the difference between
◾
researching at school and at work
Identify and locate secondary sources
◾
Document secondary sources
◾
Evaluate sources
◾
Take notes from sources
◾
Collect primary data
◾
Terms
archives, p. 47
◾
citations, p. 55
◾
close-ended questions,
◾
p. 67
direct quotation, p. 63
◾
documentation, p. 52
◾
open-ended questions, p. 67
◾
paraphrase, p. 62
◾
periodicals, p. 48
◾
plagiarism, p. 52
◾
population, p. 64
◾
primary sources, p. 46
◾
reliable data, p. 72
◾
respondents, p. 64
◾
sample, p. 64
◾
secondary sources, p. 46
◾
summarize, p. 62
◾
valid data, p. 72
◾
Focus on Technical Research
Read the sample document on the next page and answer these questions:
Notice that all lines after the fi rst line of each bibliographic entry are
•
indented. Why?
How is the last entry different from all of the others?
•
Of the sources listed, which ones did the researchers fi nd online? in print?
•
Which source is most recent?
•
What If?
The researchers were planning to publish their work (1) in a newsletter for
•
the science department at the university or (2) in a medical journal?
If the audience was interested only in the most recent fi ndings on the topic?
•
Technical Research | 43
Sample Working Bibliography
Writing@Work
Sonya Parrish is a teaching
associate and doctoral student
in literature at Miami University
in Oxford, Ohio. She has taught
first-year college composition
courses for three years. She researches primary and
secondary sources regularly for her roles as graduate student
and English teacher and incorporates technical writing in the
syllabus for her composition courses.
Sonya’s scholarly research includes hunting through digital
archives, essays, and books by other scholars and through the
literature in her field. “I rely heavily on using print sources
in which I can write notes, underline important points or
quotes, and make comments in the margins. I also compile notes from texts
into Word documents that present the information in a more unified and
organized manner.”
Sonya teaches her students to evaluate sources using five criteria: authorship,
objectivity, knowledge, accuracy, and relevance. When evaluating websites,
Sonya helps her students see the way in which information on the Web is
authored and constructed. Different kinds of sites—such as .org and .edu
sites—deliver different kinds of information to different audiences in different
ways.
When scholarly research responds thoughtfully to other scholars’ work, it
creates a dialogue that requires proper documentation. “Writers should
acknowledge others who have provided them with information on a given
topic,” according to Sonya. “They should also think about their audience’s
expectations of accuracy and honesty in writing.” She uses GPS navigation
instructions as a metaphor for what proper citations should do: show the reader
what “path” the author took in constructing his or her argument and prove that
the path is credible. Another scholar or teacher, like Sonya, can then pick up the
hunt for information using the bibliographical trail left by other authors.
Think Critically
1. If Sonya were getting an advanced degree in biology or architecture, would
she rely as heavily on printed source material? Why or why not?
2. Suppose Sonya is teaching a section about Maya Angelou’s poetry. Give an
example of a primary source and a secondary source that Sonya might use.
Printed with permission of Sonya Parrish
Courtesy of Sonya Parrish
44 | Chapter 3
Technical Research | 45
CONDUCTING TECHNICAL RESEARCH
Information is everywhere: on the television; on the radio; in
your textbook; in your home; on CDs and DVDs; on the Web;
in magazines and newsletters; and on the lips of doctors,
professors, parents, and friends. You drive to the library where
there is a building full of information. If you want to know
something, you only have to look in the right place.
The problem that technical researchers face is not a scarcity of
information. The problem is in understanding what information
they need, where it is, how it is stored, how to retrieve it, and what
to do with it after they fi nd it. The process of conducting research
can be delineated as a series of steps, but like other parts of the
writing process, in practice, the process is fl uid, unfolding as you go.
RESEARCHING AT WORK
Employees rely on the information they collect to solve problems, to make
decisions, to answer questions, and to perform many other functions
at work. On the job, research is usually involved in all of the following
situations (and more):
TYPICAL READER
A person looking for honest answers to ques-
tions about a topic.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Locating information from appropriate
sources; evaluating its credibility; synthesiz-
ing that research into a coherent document,
presentation, or discussion; and using proper
documentation.
Recall research tasks you may
have done in a work or school
setting. For each task, what was
the purpose of the research?
How was the workplace
research diﬀ erent from research
you have done for pleasure or
at school? For example, how
is researching the best ways
to manage a Japanese beetle
infestation in a client’s lawn
diﬀ erent from ﬁ nding more
information about your favorite
entertainer?
Warm Up
Developing a new product
◾
Handling a production problem
◾
Purchasing equipment or services
◾
Establishing safety procedures
◾
Selecting employee benefi ts
◾
Planning an advertising campaign
◾
Unlike writing for school, writing on the job provides information to help
the business operate effectively. Its purpose is not to show the writer’s
knowledge of the topic.
For example, if a nurse writes a fact sheet explaining how patients should
manage their diabetes, the nurse is not writing to show how much he
knows about the subject, but to teach patients how to stay healthy. If a chef
creates standard operating procedures, she does not write the document to
impress readers with how much she learned in school, but rather to ensure
food safety. All of the information that writers and researchers gather and
present is used for effective job performance. Useful information that is
presented effectively can determine whether an enterprise is successful or
unsuccessful.
Before you can write at work, you may need to conduct research. In fact,
many decisions and actions at work require more information than you have
at hand. You probably begin by determining what you already know. Then
considering your audience, purpose, and scope, you gather and evaluate
new information and likely form conclusions about the material you read.
Before you conduct the research, you must make sure you know who, what,
where, when, why, and how. For example, who is involved and who will use
your research? What do these people need to know? Where will you search
for information—within or outside your organization or both? Why are you
46 | Chapter 3
researching this topic? How will you collect information, and how will it be
used? You also need a strategy for:
Finding and evaluating the right material and the best sources.
◾
Conducting the research and reading effi ciently.
◾
Carefully and accurately recording the information you fi nd so that you
◾
do not accidentally plagiarize or violate the owner’s copyright.
Documenting where you found the information so that you or someone
◾
else can fi nd it again.
Researchers may fi nd some data easily, such as production fi gures that are
readily available on the corporate network. Sometimes, though, researchers
must search extensively for information.
Employees have two basic sources of information: secondary sources and
primary sources. Secondary sources are indirect or secondhand reports of
information, such as the
description of an event the
writer or speaker did not
witness. When a newspaper
reporter describes what exec-
utives of a closing textile
plant said, that description is
a secondary source. Primary
sources, on the other hand,
are direct or fi rsthand reports
of facts or observations, such
as an eyewitness account or
a diary. The writer or speaker
is the one who witnessed the
event or developed the idea.
For example, hearing a
company president rather
than a reporter give reasons
for a plant’s closing is
primary information.
Likewise, a journal is a
fi rsthand account of the
writer’s experiences and is,
therefore, a primary source.
However, if you use ideas
from another person’s journal in a report on healthy lifestyles, the borrowed
ideas become secondary data in your report because you did not experience
or observe them yourself.
Researchers generally start with secondary sources because they often give
general overviews and offer useful background information. Secondary
sources are usually easier and less expensive to consult than primary
sources. The overviews these sources can give help researchers understand
what is already known about the topic. A problem solver may even learn
that someone has already discovered a solution.
dstephens/iStockphoto.com
To view an annotated
bibliography, a list of sources
with descriptive notes
about each source, go to
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click
the link for Chapter 3; then
click Sample Documents.
Technical Research | 47
FINDING SECONDARY DATA
To solve most problems, your fi rst step is to explore the available secondary
data. After all, you do not want to “reinvent the wheel.” If the answer
already exists, you do not need to spend time, effort, and money to
rediscover it.
For work-related research, you will probably use one or more of the
following sources of secondary data: your organization’s correspondence and
report archives (collections or repositories of documents), a library catalog,
periodicals, and general reference materials. While these secondary data
sources may be available in print (sometimes called hard copy), most will be
available in print and electronic fi les.
Correspondence and Report Archives
A logical place to begin looking for an answer to a problem is in the
organization where the problem exists. Most organizations keep archives of
all correspondence and reports. Especially in large organizations, archives
are generally maintained locally or remotely in an electronic format on the
organization’s intranet so that people who need the information have access
but the fi les are not available to the public. On the other hand, some highly
regulated organizations such as pharmaceutical companies may be required
to keep print as well as electronic copies of essential information.
Employees may use archived documents to learn about the history of the
problem or topic. They may fi nd letters, memos, or reports explaining when
problems were fi rst noted, what kinds of investigation were conducted, and
whether a solution was successful.
When the research topic does not have a history, relevant facts and statistics
may be found in a variety of sources within the organization’s records.
Library Catalog
The researcher’s next stop is the company’s library or a public or academic
library. Some large businesses have an in-house or corporate library that
contains specialized materials relating to the business it serves. In addition
to company-produced reports such as production fi gures, accident reports,
and personnel information, these internal libraries typically hold materials
that employees need in order to stay current in the fi eld in which they work.
A software company’s library may contain books and journals specializing in
software development and marketing. Because these company libraries focus
specifi cally on the needs of employees, they do not compete with public or
other libraries by carrying all types of reading and research materials. They
often contain more electronic than paper resources. If no in-house library is
STOP AND THINK
How is researching at work different from researching at school? Why do
professionals conduct research?
As a new sales representative,
you are going to Japan to
meet your ﬁ rst prospective
customer. If you know little
about Japanese people and
customs, where can you ﬁ nd
out whether you should take
the customer a gift and what
is a good choice if you do
take a gift? List several things
you need to know and where
you can ﬁ nd the information.
Warm Up
To view Ways to Avoid
Common Research Pitfalls,
go to www.cengage
.com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link
for Chapter 3; then click Data
Files.
48 | Chapter 3
available to the company’s problem solvers, they must go to an
academic, research, municipal, or regional library.
Whether in a corporate, public, or research library, employees
looking for secondary data may start locating materials through
the library catalog. The library catalog helps researchers fi nd
books, pamphlets, periodicals, audiovisual materials, and other
holdings. In fact, it is now common practice for libraries also
to catalog certain websites and other electronic sources such
as e-books. Most libraries have computerized catalogs that are
searchable by subject, title, and author and sometimes by other
categories such as date or keyword. Most catalog systems also
send requested entries to a printer for printing the records.
Generally, libraries have integrated systems so that the online
catalog can tell where a book is located and whether it has been
checked out.
After the user keys the author’s name, a title, or a subject, the
online catalog displays a list of sources and their locations.
Because materials are often cataloged using authorized subject
headings from the Library of Congress Subject Headings, using
keywords found in this reference can make a search more
effective. If a search yields one book with useful information, a
new search help the keywords found in that book’s entry will
likely produce other helpful sources.
If a researcher fi nds that a particular book is not in the library, the researcher
may request that the book be ordered from another library through an
interlibrary loan. The book also may be found online through a service such as
NetLibrary, a subscription database that offers online access to full-text books.
Most online library catalogs are user-friendly, but you should not hesitate to
ask a librarian for help. Librarians can explain how to use the equipment,
what the standard subject headings are, and how to search so you fi nd what
you need quickly and effi ciently. Remember that the catalog will lead you to
sources for background and in-depth information. For more recent data, use
periodicals or Internet sources.
Periodicals
Magazines, journals, newsletters, and newspapers are called periodicals
because they are published at specifi ed intervals of time. (Journals are
magazines that are published for a scholarly or academic audience.) When
you need current information, periodicals—whether online or in print—are
one type of source you should seek. Periodicals are more current than
books, but newspapers, especially daily papers, generally provide even more
current information than periodicals. In addition, many periodicals, such as
Newsweek and The New York Times, are now published on the Internet and
in print.
The next question is how to fi nd the articles you need in the periodicals.
Library catalogs tell you what print periodicals the library holds in different
subject areas, but to fi nd specifi c articles, you need to search an index or a
database.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
When you visit a library, besides the physical
library, you also have access to thousands
of other libraries throughout the world.
WorldCat, an Online Computer Library
Center, Inc. (OCLC) product, links you to
the collections of more than 71,000 (and
growing) member libraries of OCLC, giving
you access to more than 135 million records
for books, manuscript collections, audiovisual
materials, and computer ﬁ les in a variety of
languages.
Think Critically
Does access to so much information in
many diﬀ erent media present problems for
researchers? Explain.
Technical Research | 49
In the past, indexes, printed on paper and bound as books or magazines,
were time-consuming to use. Today most periodical searches are conducted
electronically. Many web-based databases, available to libraries by
subscription, index periodical content. Gale, EBSCOhost, ProQuest, and
Elsevier are some of the best-known database providers. In addition, many
of these databases are no longer just indexes; they now provide a large
amount of full-text content from periodical articles, books, encyclopedias,
and more. Some of the databases, such as LexisNexis and Academic Search
Premier, are general; others are subject-specifi c, such as SIRS, which
includes publications dealing with the social sciences. In addition, some
databases, such as America’s Newspapers and Newspaper Source Plus,
specialize in newspapers, and these two databases index and include
actual articles.
You can access other indexes through a service provider such as OCLC
(Online Computer Library Center, Inc.). For example, WorldCat is an
OCLC index of physical holdings (recordings, tapes, books, papers, and
dissertations). WorldCat users might locate materials at other libraries to
place an interlibrary loan request.
General Reference Materials
General reference materials such as encyclopedias, dictionaries, handbooks,
almanacs, and fact books are quick ways to get information. Many users
rely on easy access to general reference sources for background information.
They may fi rst check those that are available online, such as Grolier Online
Encyclopedia or Merriam-Webster Online. However, a library usually offers
more comprehensive resources either in the print reference collection or
online in subscription databases.
Some websites even offer access to reference tools. For example, the
Encyclopedia Britannica website provides an encyclopedia, a dictionary, and
an atlas. Also, Bartleby.com gives users access to several reference tools,
including dictionaries, thesauruses, fact books, and books of quotations.
Some materials continue to be available on CD-ROM, such as World Book
Multimedia Encyclopedia®, but the easy access to Internet materials is
lessening the need for CD and DVD materials.
Reference materials come in general interest versions. Some examples
include World Book Encyclopedia, Encyclopedia Britannica, and Webster’s
Dictionary. Others are special interest versions, such as Encyclopedia
of Information Ethics and Security (2008) and The American Heritage
Stedman’s Medical Dictionary (2008). In addition, The Encyclopedia of
Educational Technology, a website created and maintained by San Diego
State University, covers performance, training, and instructional design
and technology.
Electronic Resources
In addition to periodical databases, indexes, and online general reference
materials such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, computers connected to
the Internet provide a wealth of information on countless topics. Because the
Internet is a worldwide collection of computer networks, it is an information
To visit the San Diego State
University site for The
Encyclopedia of Educational
Technology, go to www.
cengage.com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link
for Chapter 3; then click
Web Links.
50 | Chapter 3
highway connecting government, military, educational, and commercial
organizations and private citizens to a range of services and resources.
Therefore, you can get information from a huge variety of sources over the
Internet. The World Wide Web (WWW or the Web) is one system for accessing
information via the Internet. The Web uses http, a language for transmitting
data, and browsers such as Internet Explorer® and Firefox® to locate web
documents called web pages that may be linked to each other with hyperlinks.
Web documents often contain graphics, sounds, text, and video.
Users with access to the Internet may participate in bulletin boards, e-mail,
LISTSERVs, social networking, blogs (websites to which people regularly
contribute content, including text, graphics, video, and sound, as well as
links to other websites such as online journals and news/commentary
sites), wikis (a collection of web pages to which any user may add or delete
content), and other means of exchanging information. If, for example,
someone had problems with his or her car and was not able to resolve the
issue with the car dealer, the car owner could retrieve consumer information
from the manufacturer, advocacy groups, legal professionals, and other
consumers online.
Finding Electronic Information
As a researcher, how do you get to the tremendous amount of information
on the Internet? You can search the Web using a search engine such as
Yahoo, Google, or Clusty in much the same way you search a database using
keywords and topics.
However, search engines do not look through all information on the World
Wide Web. Each engine searches only a portion of all of the sites. Even
metasearch engines such as mamma.com, surfwax.com, and dogpile.com do
not cover the entire Web.
tacojim/iStockphoto.com
Technical Research | 51
While search engines cover only a portion of the Web, a researcher’s concern
often is how to fi lter through so much information to fi nd what is useful.
Search engines use “spiders” to go out periodically and view web pages and
links on sites; an “index” that catalogs words, Internet addresses, and other
information about the pages the spider fi nds; and software to fi lter through
all of the pages in the index to fi nd matches when a search is requested.
Because the “spider” goes out every few days or weeks, it detects changes
made to web pages. However, until the information has been indexed, it is
not available for researchers.
Because each search engine visits and indexes different sites and is updated
at different times, you should routinely use at least three search engines.
Then you can compare the results of your searches to determine which
search engines are most effective.
Even after you have used three search engines, some Web information may
evade your search. For example, Invisible Web or deep Web refers to sites
that are not registered or typically searched by search engines. To get to this
huge inventory of information, searchers may fi nd Librarians’ Internet Index
(http://lii.org) and Infomine (http://infomine.ucr.edu) helpful in locating
data in the deep Web. The wealth of information to be found in government
documents also requires special search strategies. Use tools such as the
Catalog of U.S. Government Publications (http://catalog.gpo.gov) and FedStats
(www.fedstats.gov) or consult a government documents librarian.
Searching with Keywords
Choose specifi c, precise keywords; then consider using the advanced or
custom (terms may vary with search engines) search procedures to refi ne
your search. The guidelines in the custom search or the Help section of
the search engine should explain how to use logic or keyword connectors
to limit or expand your search. While the following connectors are typical,
check the guidelines for each search engine you use.
Use these strategies TO LIMIT A SEARCH:
When you connect keywords with AND, the search yields both keywords.
Using 1 (the plus sign) gets the same results.
Ex: juvenile AND diabetes
Ex: juvenile 1 diabetes
Yields: Sites that deal with juvenile
diabetes only
When you connect keywords with NOT, the search yields the fi rst keyword,
not the second. Using 2 (the minus sign) gets the same results.
Ex: diabetes NOT juvenile
Ex: diabetes – juvenile
Yields: Sites that deal with any type of
diabetes except juvenile
When you surround keywords with quotation marks (“keyword keyword”),
the search yields the same keywords in the same order beside each other.
Ex: “capital punishment”
Yields: Sites that include the same
term, capital punishment, but not
capital alone or punishment alone
52 | Chapter 3
Use these strategies TO EXPAND A SEARCH:
When you connect keywords with OR, the search yields either keyword.
Ex: diabetes OR juvenile
Yields: Sites that contain diabetes
and/or juvenile as the topic
When you place an asterisk (*) after the word, the search yields words that
contain the base or root word.
Ex: biblio*
Yields: Sites that include bibliography,
bibliographer, bibliophile, bibliotheca,
and so on
Remember that you can get the same data in many different ways. One
researcher may fi nd an article by skimming a journal from the library shelf.
Another researcher may do an online search in the library or on his or her
home or offi ce computer. Still another researcher may fi nd a link to an online
journal in a discussion group. Explore the many tools available to you for
research.
STOP AND THINK
Using the list you drafted in the Warm Up on page 47, underline the
information that would come from secondary sources. For those underlined
items, add any other sources or methods you can think of for accessing
information.
DOCUMENTING SECONDARY SOURCES
Documentation is a system of giving credit to another person (writer or
speaker) for his or her work. It is using a citation system to note whose ideas
or words the writer is using and where he or she found them. Responsible
writers document ideas and materials they borrow or use.
Plagiarism is the act of using another person’s words and/or ideas
without properly documenting or giving credit. While plagiarism is a
serious academic offense, sometimes causing students to fail a course or
to be expelled from school, it is even more serious in the workplace. Theft
of another person’s work often results in lost jobs, lawsuits, and ruined
reputations.
For instance, Doris Kearns Goodwin, a respected historian who won the
Pulitzer Prize for History in 1995, taught and served on the Board of
Overseers at Harvard, assisted President Lyndon Johnson with his memoirs,
and won many awards, admitted to plagiarism in a book she wrote in 1987.
Despite a long career with many achievements and honors, this admission
caused Goodwin to be ridiculed in public, scorned by her peers, and
subjected to signifi cant fi nancial loss. The University of Delaware withdrew
its invitation for her to speak at graduation; PBS placed her on indefi nite
leave from the Jim Lehrer news show; she had to defend the credibility of
Has someone else,
intentionally or accidentally,
received credit for your ideas
or work? If so, how did you
feel? If not, describe how you
might feel.
Warm Up
Technical Research | 53
her other books; and her publisher had to pay Lynne McTaggart, the author
of the book from which Goodwin had extensively plagiarized. As you can
see, plagiarism, intentional or accidental, can be damaging.
You may ask, “What exactly do I document?” You document anything you
use from another person’s work. Remember, if you do not document, you
are no longer borrowing; you are stealing and will be treated as a thief of
intellectual property. Therefore, to keep your credibility, reputation, and job,
document borrowed phrases, sentences, or ideas in the form of summaries,
paraphrases, and direct quotations. For instance, if you reported on the
environmental impact of a new soy ink for your company’s publications
division, you would document researched facts, contradictory statements,
and others’ unique ideas.
On the other hand, you do not need to document common knowledge
or information that your audience typically knows. However, common
knowledge may differ for each audience, particularly expert audiences.
For instance, the fact that Bill Gates is chief executive offi cer of Microsoft
Corporation is certainly common knowledge for an audience of computer
engineers. However, Gates’s management philosophy might be common
knowledge for business school graduates. If information is common
knowledge for your target audience, you do not need to document it. The
same information directed to a different audience may not be common
knowledge and, therefore, would need to be documented.
The writer’s fi eld determines the documentation format. For example,
Modern Language Association (MLA) format, which is most likely taught
in your English class, is the documentation system used in the humanities.
For tips on avoiding
plagiarism, see How
Do I Safeguard Against
Plagiarism? at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 3;
then click Data Files.
For a review of what
information should and
should not be documented,
see Information to Cite and
Not to Cite at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 3;
then click Data Files.
You and your good friend Armando work for a desktop publishing company
that creates marketing materials for bands performing in your area. Your job
is to contact the bands, design the posters and other marketing materials,
and publish and distribute the materials. You recently learned that you and
Armando know the band members who are coming to town to give a concert.
In fact, you know the band members so well that you have copies of some
unpublished songs they shared with you before they became famous.
Armando is in charge of creating the marketing materials for this band. When
you look over the finished products, you notice he included parts of the
unpublished songs as a way to lure fans to the concert. You feel uneasy about
publishing these songs, but you know that you cannot reach the band members
in time to ask permission before the copy must be delivered to the printer.
Think Critically
How can you find out whether you and Armando are breaking copyright laws if
you decide to publish the songs?
Communication
Dilemma
54 | Chapter 3
Other documentation systems include the American Psychological
Association (APA) system for social sciences and the Council of Science
Editors (CSE) system for biological sciences.
In addition, most fi elds have a style manual. A style manual is a book of
rules for developing a document, including formatting and documentation.
The Chicago Manual of Style, the stylebook of The University of Chicago
Press, is the preferred style manual for many technical fi elds, including
anthropology.
Because each documentation system has a particular format, consult your
instructor (or employer) for the appropriate style manual. For example, if
as a human resources offi cer you investigate the effectiveness of a test used
to screen job applicants (a psychology-related topic), you probably will use
American Psychological Association (APA) style. However, a
report outlining the water quality of a prospective site for a trout
farm (a biology-related topic) may require that you use Council
of Science Editors (CSE) style guidelines.
All documentation systems explain how to identify each source.
However, the emphasis, order, and punctuation may be different.
For example, the APA and CBE emphasize publication dates in
citations because dates are critical in the sciences. The MLA
emphasizes the author and location in the text. This book uses
the MLA system.
Documentation comes in two parts: (1) the Works Cited (or
bibliography), a list of sources at the end of the document, and
(2) the internal citations. The documentation process begins
with a working bibliography.
Bibliography and Works Cited
A bibliography (also called Works Cited in MLA) is a list of
sources used in researching a topic. While collecting data,
researchers develop a working bibliography. They continue
to locate and add new sources to the list during the research
process. Sometimes they delete a source from the list when they
fi nd one that is more recent or more reliable.
When the research is fi nished, writers use the list’s fi nal form
to prepare a bibliography. A bibliography has three purposes:
(1) It establishes credibility by showing readers what sources
you consulted; (2) it allows others to fi nd your information path so they
can continue or evaluate the study; and (3) it gives credit to other people’s
thoughts, words, and sentences that you used.
As you look at secondary sources, you develop a paper or an electronic
working bibliography. You can enter publication information for each source
on a 3" 3 5" index card. Cards allow you to arrange entries easily for the
fi nal source list. However, many writers prefer to maintain bibliographic
data electronically. Like the cards, computers allow you to add, delete, or
For more information on
Plagiarism—What It Looks
Like and How to Prevent It,
go to www.cengage.com/
school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 3;
then click Data Files.
Although the University of Chicago Press
online edition does not replace the book
edition of The Chicago Manual of Style,
you can still get information on how to
cite books, electronic resources, journals,
and newspapers.
The website of the Modern Language
Association (MLA) provides the history
of MLA along with many book titles
about the English language and archives
of MLA radio programs.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 3
and refer to the MLA Handbook FAQ.
(1) In your research writing, should
you use underlining or italics for titles of
books, magazines, journals, and other
publications? (2) How do you create the
indention used in an MLA bibliographic
entry and in a works cited list?
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Technical Research | 55
move sources easily. In addition, software is available that automatically
puts source information into MLA form. Hypertext programs show images
of cards where users key bibliographic information.
After you complete the research and draft the document, you remove the
sources that you did not use. You place sources you did use in order. For
MLA, use alphabetical order by the fi rst author’s last name or by the word
that appears at the beginning of the entry (often a title) if the author is not
given. Other systems arrange sources differently. You will use the arranged
cards to compose the Works Cited page, as shown in the sample working
bibliography on page 43. This page is placed at the end of the document
or report.
Internal Citations
People will assume that ideas are yours unless they see a citation in the text.
Citations are written indications of the source of borrowed materials. Enter
internal documentation immediately after each summary, paraphrase, and
direct quotation to tell your reader where you found the information. Internal
citations in MLA consist of the author’s last name (or a shortened form of the
title if no author is named) and the page number. When the author’s name is
mentioned in the introductory sentence, only the page numbers are included
in the citation. Readers then use the author’s name or the title to fi nd the full
bibliographic entry in the alphabetical listing of works cited. Place the citation
at the end of the sentence (or group of sentences) containing the source
material in your document. Enclose the citation in parentheses and place the
period after the ending parenthesis, as shown in Figure 3.1 on the next page.
sdominick/iStockphoto.com
56 | Chapter 3
Excerpt from Works Cited
GuanJun, Gao, Fan Lu, and Hua YueJin. “Engineering Deinococcus Radiodurans
into Biosensor to Monitor Radioactivity and Genotoxicity in Environment.”
Chinese Science Bulletin 53.11 (2008): 1675–81. Academic Search Premier.
Web. 21 Nov. 2009.
Fialka, John J. “Position Available: Indestructible Bugs To Eat Nuclear Waste:
Scientists Envision New Role for Sturdy Bacteria Breed: Creating ‘Super Conan.’”
Wall Street Journal 16 Nov. 2004, eastern ed.: A1. Print.
Impey, Chris. The Living Cosmos: Our Search for Life in the Universe. New York:
Random, 2007. Print.
“Tough Bug Reveals Key to Radiation Resistance.” New Scientist 193.2596 (24 Mar.
2007): 21. MasterFILE Premier. Web. 11 Oct. 2009.
Figure 3.1 Internal Citation and Works Cited
Excerpt from Research Document
f
Scientists who fi rst found Deinococcus radiodurans in an irradiated can of meat in
1956 were surprised. Irradiating food, they thought, would preserve it, yet this pink
bacteria was creating a nasty bulge in the can. Then in 1996, scientists working
around a nuclear waste tank in Savannah River, South Carolina, found the same
tough bacteria (which came to be known as Conan the Bacterium), growing on a
rod in the tank. Because this bacterium can not only survive, but thrive in “some of
Earth’s most inhospitable environments,” the United States Department of Energy
believes it may be used as a solution to the potential $260 billion cleanup of nuclear
waste sites across the country (Fialka A1).
Researchers are just beginning to understand how Deinococcus radiodurans survives
radiation and what other uses it may have. According to Chris Impey’s The Living
Cosmos, this bacterium can repair damage to its DNA quickly, typically in 24 hours,
by storing fi ve or more copies of its genome ready to be replicated (107). One
scientist for the Uniformed Services University suggests that, if people and animals
can develop repair systems similar to Deinococcus radiodurans, they too can
withstand higher doses of radiation. Avoiding radiation sickness would be helpful,
for example, in cancer treatment and space travel (“Tough Bug”). Another use was
found by a group of researchers in China who have genetically modifi ed Deinococcus
radiodurans with a green florescence protein to create a biosensor that glows
when “biological hazards of radioactive and toxic pollutants” are present
(GuanJun et al.).
Technical Research | 57
EVALUATING SOURCES
As you have discovered, not everything that appears in print (or on your
computer, radio, or TV) is true. In fact, many mistakes, untruths, and
half-truths that you would not want to repeat are published. For instance,
a fi nancial planner who uses information from an unreliable source to
make faulty investments for her clients will not stay in business very long.
So when you conduct research, choose your data sources critically and
carefully.
These guidelines for evaluating sources will help you get started.
Publication Date
When you want to know the most recent discoveries and happenings in a
particular area, you need up-to-date information. Therefore, you must check
publication dates. The data in a book may be even older than the copyright
date indicates because some books take two or more years to be published.
Likewise, websites without dates may not have been checked or revised in
several years.
Author’s Credentials
An author’s reputation is an important element in determining the value
of a potential source. An author or authors with a strong and positive
reputation can lend credibility to your writing. Furthermore, the methods
and resources used by an author or editor have the ability to help or harm
your writing.
Reputation
Often the preface or introduction of a book outlines the education and
experience of the writers or editors. Likewise, magazine and journal articles
sometimes include brief biographies. Check websites, particularly the
beginning and ending pages, for an author’s biography and credentials. If the
publication gives no information about the author or editor, consider factors
such as the reputation of the journal, publisher, or associated business or
organization.
You also can check an author’s reputation in reference sources such as Who’s
Who in America, Contemporary Authors, Who’s Who in Science, and Who’s
Who in Small Business and Entrepreneurship Worldwide. Some of these
references, such as Contemporary Authors, are found online.
Based on what you learn about the author’s credentials, determine whether
he or she qualifi es as an expert in the fi eld. If you have two sources on the
same topic, you might fi nd one author to be more credible than the other.
STOP AND THINK
What happens when writers incorrectly or incompletely cite sources? What are
the costs to businesses? to professionals?
Have you ever repeated
something someone else
said only to have others
say that it is untrue? If so,
how did you feel about
the person who gave you
the information initially?
Did you continue to share
information that he or she
told you? How do you decide
whose information to repeat
and whose not to repeat?
Warm Up
58 | Chapter 3
Methods and Resources
Usually, in the introduction of a book or in the opening paragraphs of an
article, the author or editor will explain the methods used to reach the
conclusions. If you believe those methods are fl awed, the book or article
loses credibility as a potential source. Likewise, you may evaluate a potential
source by the resources its author uses. Resources may be mentioned in the
text and listed in the works cited or bibliography.
Depth and Coverage
Determine whether the source covers the topic in a way that is appropriate
for your and your audience’s needs. Does the text explore the topic deeply
enough and in enough detail to be useful? Is it too technical, or does it
provide only a surface treatment? Is the source a popular or commercial
publication or a scholarly publication? Scholarly sources such as peer-
reviewed journals and university press or academic publications generally
offer more thorough and reliable information.
In addition, you should look critically at the tone and presentation of
source material. Favor those sources that present all sides (opposing views)
Another aspect of borrowing or using others’ words and ideas involves
copyright. Copyright legally protects the rights of writers and gives them a
way to control how their work is used. Copyright applies only to tangible and
original expression, not to oral presentations.
Using copyrighted work requires special considerations. If the way you plan
to use someone’s words or ideas fits the definition of fair use, you may use
the work without paying for it or getting permission. Yet you still must give
credit to the creator. Fair use guidelines are special exceptions that allow
others to use a portion of a writer’s work in a limited way. Fair use evaluates
the purpose and nature of the new use, the character of the copyrighted
work, the percentage of the work being used, and the effect of the use on the
original’s marketability. Ultimately, fair use requires that the new user not
damage the original or profit from its use.
When you are uncertain about whether to request copyright permission or to
document a source, consult other writers, your supervisor or mentor at work,
or others with experience in the field. If you are still in doubt, it is better to
request permission and to document. No writer or professional has ruined
his or her reputation or career by overdocumenting, but many have by not
documenting.
Think Critically
If you find a cartoon in the Sunday newspaper, should you document or
request permission before using it to introduce a concept or highlight a point
in a report you are writing?
Focus on
Ethics
Technical Research | 59
of an issue in an objective tone. Obvious biases, lack of logical reasoning,
little or weak evidence, or unbalanced treatment are all reasons to look for
other sources.
Special Considerations for Electronic Sources
These guidelines pertain to many sources, but the increasing availability
of electronic materials means that researchers are spending more time and
effort searching online. Therefore, you should give special consideration to
evaluating electronic sources. Because its materials are not screened in any
way, the Internet contains more trash than treasure. Remember that anyone,
from the bored 10-year-old next door to the busy physics professor, can post
a website.
You will fi nd the following guidelines to be useful in evaluating electronic
information:
Is an author or sponsoring group listed?
◾
Are credentials or experiences
noted to show that the author is an expert on the subject covered? Is the
author or sponsor mentioned in other sources? If no author or sponsor is
given, a critical reader might wonder why. For instance, an animal rights
supporter could post an anonymous site exaggerating abusive aspects of
corporate farming methods. Without knowing the author and his or her
agenda, readers might not recognize the bias of the site.
What is the electronic address?
◾
The abbreviation in the web address
should show where the source originates. Several examples follow.
Educational institution
.edu
Nonprofi t organization
.org
Government organization
.gov
Military
.mil
For-profi t or commercial organization
.com
Sites sponsored by schools are usually academic and objective, providing
reliable information. Government-sponsored sites—whether local, state,
national, or international—typically present reliable information, such
as U.S. census data. However, these sites may be biased. For example,
the President controls the press secretary’s message and the focus of a
given story.
Likewise, many nonprofi t organizations such as the American Lung
Association maintain trustworthy sites, but some may be biased by the
organization’s agenda. For example, the website of the National Rifl e
Association is unlikely to provide statistics on the number of children
killed by guns in their homes, but is more likely to show how many
burglaries are stopped by homeowners with guns. However, commercial
sites are almost always biased. After all, readers cannot expect a web page
sponsored by Gerber® to explain to parents why they should not feed
Gerber® baby food to their children.
60 | Chapter 3
What are the references and/or links?
◾
Does the website include a list
of sources used in preparing the page that readers can check? Are links to
other reputable, reliable sites included? Are the links to scholarly sites or
to commercial or obviously biased sites?
Is there balance and a clear purpose?
◾
Does the site present the subject
fairly? Does it include opposing viewpoints? Is the design clear and
careful to aid the reader’s understanding, or does the design encourage
strong reactions or confusion? Offensive images and cluttered, irrelevant
information may be intended to create a particular response from users.
For instance, viewers are more likely to have an emotional reaction than
a logical response to an image of caged animals in a medical research
facility. Understanding a site’s purpose—to sell ideas, products, or
services; to share knowledge; or to incite strong reactions—can help
determine how reliable the information is.
What do design and presentation suggest?
◾
If the site is well-designed
and effective, the data it contains is more likely to have been treated with
the same care and effort. Similarly, a site that demonstrates effective
communication skills—free of grammar and spelling errors—is more likely
to gain a reader’s trust.
twohumans/iStockphoto.com
STOP AND THINK
Read this case and consider possible outcomes: Colleen received time and
money to study the effects of a particular veterinary medicine on humans. Her
report requesting permission for this project was based primarily on one study
published in an animal science journal. Over the last year, this study was largely
discredited in animal and human medical journals.
TAKING NOTES FROM SOURCES
Employees doing research note information they collect, just as you do
when writing a paper in school. When you discover data you believe will be
helpful, write complete, careful notes. Some researchers prefer to use
4" 3 6" note cards because they are easy to arrange and carry. At the same
time, laptop and handheld computers encourage researchers to take notes
electronically. The computer user can transfer notes to the fi rst draft of the
report without having to rekey them. Also, researchers reading a document
online can copy and paste material they want to quote directly into the draft
document.
You should read your source material carefully before making any notes.
Understanding your sources thoroughly is an important part of being a
successful researcher.
Read the excerpt in Figure 3.2 from an article describing a genetically
engineered bacterium developed from Deinococcus radiodurans. John J.
Fialka wrote the article “Position Available: Indestructible Bugs To Eat
Nuclear Waste” for The Wall Street Journal. You will fi nd the complete
bibliographic entry on page 43 in the sample working bibliography. This
passage will be used to discuss note taking.
On each card or with note-taking software, include (1) the information you
want to use—only one idea per card, (2) the topic, and (3) the source and
page number(s) from which you took the data. Figures 3.3 and 3.4 illustrate
the way some researchers use note cards.
You can use borrowed information in your notes three ways:
1. Summary
2. Paraphrase
3. Direct quotation
Examine the notes you take
during class. About what
percentage of the notes are
written in the instructor’s or
the speaker’s exact words?
About what percentage
is written in your own
words—your interpretation of
the instructor’s or speaker’s
comments? How many notes
are your ideas or perhaps
conclusions you came to as a
result of something someone
else said?
Warm Up
Technical Research | 61
Figure 3.2 Excerpt from a Published Article
The original Conan proved to be a wimp among extremophiles. It could handle
radiation but not the solvent toluene and other chemicals normally found in bomb
makers’ wastes. So in 1997, the Energy Department started work on a genetically
manipulated bug that researchers called Super Conan.
Super Conan now lives in a petri dish at the Uniformed Services University of the
Health Sciences, a U.S. military research facility in Bethesda, MD. It can handle
nasty chemicals as well as radiation, but the researcher who developed it,
Michael J. Daly, says that the government is afraid to let it out.
“We’re at a point where we could do some fi eld trials,” he says, adding that his
sponsors at the Energy Department doubt that the public is ready for the release of
the laboratory-engineered bug into the environment. It might eat nuclear wastes,
but they worry about what else it might do, he says.
62 | Chapter 3
Summary
To summarize is to condense longer material, keeping essential or main
ideas and omitting unnecessary parts such as examples and illustrations.
Be consistent with the source’s idea, but use your words. When conducting
job-related research, you might summarize a journal article or a chapter of a
book that is helpful at supporting evidence in a report. The original material
might be an entire book, but your summary could be a few paragraphs or
one sentence. The note in Figure 3.3 summarizes the original material you
read in the article about bacterium.
Paraphrase
To paraphrase is to present someone else’s idea in one’s own words,
phrases, and sentence structure. While a summary should be shorter than
the original material, a paraphrase generally is about the same length or
even a bit longer than the original. A writer paraphrases when the material
supports a point but is not unique or dramatic enough to be quoted. Most
of the materials that writers use from other sources are paraphrased.
Paraphrasing allows writers to include other people’s thinking while putting
the borrowed ideas into their own words and sentences. As you practice
paraphrasing, you may fi nd the following process helpful.
1. Read the original carefully.
2. Put it aside.
3. Write the idea in your own way.
4. Compare your version with the original.
5. Make certain you have used your own words and sentence structure and
have accurately conveyed the author’s idea. (Borrowing three or more
words in a row is quoting and requires quotation marks.)
Figure 3.4 contains a paraphrase of the last two sentences from the
excerpt on bacterium. Notice that the wording and sentence structure are
signifi cantly different. Changing or moving a word or two is not effective
paraphrasing. Avoid plagiarism by stating the borrowed idea in your own
way, choosing words and sentence structure you would normally use, and
properly crediting the author of the source.
Fear of environmental damage from Super Conan
To be able to deal with some of the defense industry’s wastes, the
Energy Department used the radiation-resistant Conan and geneti-
cally engineered the bacterium to handle hazardous chemicals left
from bomb making. But now the government is unwilling to release
this Super Conan for fi eld testing for fear of unknown environmental
effects.
Figure 3.3 Summary Note Card
Fialka A1
Technical Research | 63
Direct Quotation
Direct quotation, the third way writers incorporate material into their
documents, is the use of borrowed ideas, words, phrases, and sentences
exactly as they appear in the original document. However, you do not want
to overuse quotations. Avoid a cut-and-paste patchwork style by making
less than 20 percent of your document direct quotations. Copy phrases and
sentences directly only when you cannot present the idea as well in your own
words. For instance, if the original writer or speaker chose unusual words or
composed unique or dramatic sentences, you may want your reader to get
the fl avor of the original by quoting directly. Another reason for using direct
quotation is to enhance your credibility by using the words of a well-known
authority. Figure 3.5 is a model of a note card using direct quotation.
Introduce Quotations
Writers introduce quotations to make the writing smooth. Do not let quoted
sentences stand alone. You can integrate quotations into your text with
words such as according to one expert and Greg Markham claims or with
complete sentences such as the following:
Benjamin Franklin gave this advice in Poor Richard’s Almanac: “Early to bed,
early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.”
Indicate Added or Omitted Material
When you need to add to or edit a direct quotation for clarity or conciseness,
use brackets to set your changes apart from the quoted words, as in the
sentences below.
Original: “After the board meeting in which a 2 percent fi ne was
approved, she signed her resignation letter.”
Addition for clarity: “After the board meeting in which a 2 percent fi ne
was approved, [Maureen O’Keefe] signed her resignation letter.”
Description of D. radiodurans
Fialka A1
One reporter describes Deinococcus radiodurans as “a wimp among
extremophiles.”
Figure 3.5 Direct Quotation Note Card
Figure 3.4 Paraphrase Note Card
h
d
No fi eld trials for Super Conan
According to Michael J. Daly, the developer of Super Conan, the Energy
Department refuses to fi eld-test the bacterium for fear that it might eat
not only the nuclear waste it was designed to eat, but also some things it
was not intended to destroy.
Fialka A1
Complete the activity Working
with Direct Quotations
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 3;
then click Data Files.
64 | Chapter 3
You may need to quote only part of a sentence. In that case, use an ellipsis—
three spaced dots—to show where you omitted words from the original.
However, if you include a paraphrase of the idea (rather than omit it), you do
not need an ellipsis. If the reason for O’Keefe’s resignation is not important
to your work, you might quote the source this way:
Omission: “After the board meeting . . . , [Maureen O’Keefe] signed her
resignation letter.”
The ellipsis shows that the clause “in which a 2 percent fi ne was approved”
was left out of the quotation.
STOP AND THINK
When should a writer use direct quotation? Would you use an ellipsis or
brackets to indicate that you left out part of a quoted sentence?
COLLECTING PRIMARY DATA
Many job-related problems or questions are too unique or too current for
secondary sources to answer. A commercial fi sher may learn more about a
new net’s effectiveness by talking to other users and experimenting than by
reading the literature on nets. To solve some work-related concerns, primary
data may be more help. Primary data is gathered through fi eld research:
surveys, interviews, observation, and experimentation. Some fi eld research is
conducted in person, some by telephone, and some online.
Surveys
Surveys gather facts, beliefs, attitudes, and opinions from people. Many
businesses rely on surveys to collect information for decision making. One
example is a questionnaire accompanying a product registration form for
small appliances such as hair dryers. The manufacturer uses the data to
determine who is buying the product, how the buyer learned of the product
(what advertising method worked), and how satisfi ed the buyer is.
A survey works only when you know what you want to learn before you
begin. For example, if your goal is to learn students’ preferences for cafeteria
food, you may not want to ask for their favorite food. If you do, their
responses may not be appropriate for a school cafeteria, such as fl aming
kabobs and baked Alaska. Once you decide what you want to learn, you
should (1) carefully select your audience or respondents (people chosen
to answer question), (2) decide how you will administer your survey, and
(3) carefully plan your questions.
When you choose an audience, you must select a sample broad enough
to represent that audience. A population is the target group from which
a person wants to gather data. The owner of a garden center who wants
to know whether customers will use a repotting service would have a
population of all of the business’s customers. If the owner cannot question
all customers due to expense, time, or distance, she may choose a sample
to provide representative answers. A sample is a subgroup with the same
characteristics as the entire population. Keep in mind that the sample must
What could you do in the
following situation?
You stained your new
sweater with a chemical from
the chemistry lab. You do
not know the name of the
chemical, but you remember
the experiment and probably
would recognize the bottle
containing the chemical. You
want to have the sweater
cleaned, but you are afraid to
do so without knowing what
chemical caused the spot.
Warm Up
Technical Research | 65
be small enough for you to tabulate and analyze the results but large enough
to provide meaningful results. In some situations, companies hire specially
trained people to design and conduct surveys.
Once you know your audience, the next step is to decide how to administer
the survey. You can administer questionnaires in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by e-mail. (Today many businesses survey by e-mail.) This
decision is based on the kind of data you seek, how much time you have,
and what your budget is. If you are asking personal or controversial
questions, you should use a confi dential mailed survey to ensure a higher
return rate. Also, although many people believe their e-mail is private, it is
far from secure. In fact, in the workplace, employers have the right to access
information on company computers, which means that your e-mail is subject
to scrutiny. If time is a concern, telephone, e-mail, and in-person surveys
provide faster responses than mail surveys. Also remember that all survey
methods can be costly.
Carefully planned, effective survey instruments increase the rate of responses
received. Thus, it is important to consider the following suggestions as you
prepare surveys:
Explain why you need the information and how it will be used.
◾
Because
you are asking respondents to share data, they have the right to know
what you plan to do with the information. In a cover letter or an opening
paragraph, explain what prompted the survey. Then describe the benefi ts.
Estimate the time required to complete the survey. Many surveys also offer
to send results of the study to respondents or tell respondents where they
can fi nd the published results.
Convince your audience to participate.
◾
After all, you are requesting
their time and thoughts. They may wonder what you are giving them in
return. You might offer an incentive such as coupons, free merchandise
or services, improved or additional services, or discounts.
Pinopic/iStockphoto.com
66 | Chapter 3
Logically order questions beginning with easy-to-answer items.
◾
If
respondents have diffi culty with the fi rst questions, they are not likely
to continue. The initial questions should ask for information that is easy to
recall and not too personal. Also arrange questions in logical groupings
to aid respondents’ memory, as in the questions below.
• In what county do you live?
• How long have you lived there?
Ask only necessary questions.
◾
If you do not need the answer, do not
ask the question. For example, do not ask about income if income is not
relevant to the data you seek. People will not respond if they believe you
are wasting their time.
Write clear and nonleading questions.
◾
For responses to be useful,
questions must be clear and precise. Compare the following two
questions:
• Do you shop by mail often?
• Do you shop by mail once a month?
With the fi rst question, the respondent will answer based on his or her
defi nition of often. That answer may not be useful. Likewise, questions
should not lead respondents to particular answers. Consider the following
questions as an illustration:
• Don’t you believe that the cost of class rings is outrageous?
• Why don’t you buy your lunch in the school cafeteria?
The wording suggests a particular answer. Consider changing it as
follows:
• Do you believe the cost of class rings is reasonable or unreasonable?
• Is cost a factor in your decision not to purchase lunch in the school
cafeteria?
Make the purpose of the question clear.
◾
If the survey is to learn about
consumers’ reactions to your newspaper’s new type style, do not ask
general questions such as “Why did you purchase this newspaper?”
Answers to that general question may vary tremendously from “It was the
cheapest one on the newsstand” to “It is the one my father reads.” Such
responses will not help you fi nd what you want to know—whether people
like the new type style.
Prefer facts to opinions.
◾
When designing questions, seek facts whenever
possible. Facts provide stronger, more credible evidence. For example, ask
“Do you purchase from a mail-order catalog at least once a month?” rather
than “Do you like mail-order shopping?” However, sometimes opinions
provide useful information, as in a satisfaction survey.
Technical Research | 67
Stick to one topic per question.
◾
While you might be tempted to include
several issues in one question, the answers will be useless if you do not
know to which topic the person is responding. Suppose respondents say
yes to the question “Are you ever concerned for your safety as you walk
through the parking deck and up the stairs into the Sollenberger Building
at night?” You do not know what concerns the respondents—the deck, the
stairs, the building, or the darkness.
Plan for tabulation.
◾
Remember that once responses come in, you need
to evaluate and interpret them. Your job will be easier if you design
questions whose answers are stated as numbers. When you already know
the range of possible answers, close-ended questions (questions that
restrict the number of possible answers) such as those in Figure 3.6 allow
for a limited number of responses and are easy to tabulate.
Although more diffi cult to tabulate, open-ended questions encourage the
respondent to provide any answer he or she likes; the question gives no
suggested answers. These questions are sometimes necessary to discover
respondents’ thoughts and feelings. Unexpected attitudes or information
may be uncovered this way.
Open-ended questions ask respondents to supply words, sentences, or
short essays, as in the following examples:
• How do you think RFG’s board should respond to the new regulations?
• What could Apgard do to improve service to you and your organization?
Leave adequate space for answers when asking open-ended questions.
On the next page, Figure 3.7 gives examples of different types of questions.
1. Do you live within fi ve miles of one of our stores?
Yes_____
No_______
2. Please indicate your level of satisfaction with your purchase.
a. Extremely Satisfi ed < >
b. Satisfi ed < >
c. Somewhat Satisfi ed < >
d. Somewhat Dissatisfi ed < >
e. Dissatisfi ed < >
f. Extremely Dissatisfi ed < >
Figure 3.6 Close-Ended Questions
68 | Chapter 3
Interviews
Interviews, like surveys, are an excellent source of primary data. Interviews
give you access to experts’ facts, opinions, and attitudes that you might
not fi nd any other way. However, interviewing can be time-consuming and
Figure 3.7 Mailed Survey
Residents of Glenhaven:
We are considering your Glenhaven Rerement Community for our annual service project. With
your help, we would like to learn more about your interests. We would like to contribute
something worthwhile and lasng to your neighborhood.
Please take about ﬁve minutes now to answer these quesons. Then place the completed
form in the box marked “PHI RHO” in the Recreaon Center by August 25. If you’d like
to know the outcome, we will post a copy of the results in the same locaon on August
30.
Your age: ____45 or younger ____46–55 ____56–65 ____66–75 ____76–85
____86 or older
Do you live alone? ____yes ____no
Indicate your preferences for our service project by ranking the items below from 1 to 6,
1 being most important and 6 being least important.
____nature trail
____picnic area
____shuﬄeboard game
____croquet lawn
____exercise path
____square-foot garden sites
Check the item that best reﬂects your opinion for compleng the following sentences. If a new
outdoor area is installed in the community, I am . . .
____willing to spend two hours per month on maintenance.
____willing to pay $5 or less a year to hire a maintenance service.
____not willing to maintain the area.
Place an X within the carets of the most applicable descripon of your level of sasfacon with
the outdoor facilies now available at Glenhaven.
Very Sasﬁed< >
Somewhat Sasﬁed< >
Sasﬁed< >
Somewhat Dissasﬁed< >
Dissasﬁed< >
Very Dissasﬁed< >
What outdoor acvity (or acvies) do you enjoy most?
Thank you for your parcipaon!
Phi Rho
“Working Together to Serve”
States the reason for the
survey; states how the results
will be used
Tells how much time the survey
will take to complete; explains
how to return the survey
Single answer/multiple choice
Dual alternative
Rank order question
Single answer/multiple choice
Close-ended question
Open-ended question
Technical Research | 69
costly. To make the process as successful as possible, use the following
guidelines:
Defi ne your purpose.
◾
Know what information you want from each interviewee.
Write down the purpose and review it before talking to the interviewee.
Make an appointment.
◾
Telephone, write, or e-mail the respondent to describe
the topic and to request an interview. Whether you will be interviewing
someone by telephone, by mail, by e-mail, or in person, ask the respondent
in advance for a convenient time to conduct the interview. If the interview
will be in person, offer to visit the respondent or to arrange a suitable place
to conduct the interview.
If the interview will be via
mail or e-mail, agree on
a time frame for sending
questions and receiving
answers. For interviews
by instant messaging, set
an appointed time. Make
certain that the respondent
understands the topic and
that you have allowed
reasonable preparation time.
Moreover, be professional in
your appearance, writing, and
speaking.
Do your homework.
◾
Do
not expect the respondent to
make all of the effort. Learn
as much as possible about
the topic before you conduct
the interview.
Plan and write your
◾
questions. Prepare questions
to draw out specifi c detailed
information. Avoid vague
questions such as “How do you feel about responding to emergency calls
involving hazardous materials?” Instead, ask clear, specifi c questions such as
“What training has prepared you for emergencies involving toxic gases?” In
addition, avoid questions that require a yes or no response because they do
not encourage the speaker to elaborate. Also avoid questions that refl ect an
opinion or bias, such as “Isn’t it true that management overemphasizes shop
safety?” Instead, ask for the respondent’s views: “In regard to shop safety, does
management underemphasize, overemphasize, or adequately emphasize?”
Many interviewers develop questions on a laptop or handheld computer.
This method lets them read the questions from the machine and record
answers on it as the interview takes place. Some interviewers write
questions on one sheet of paper and record answers on another. Other
interviewers prefer to write each question and its answer on a note card.
An audio recorder may be helpful, but ask permission to record the
interview before you begin. Choose the system that works best for you.
© Stephen Coburn, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
70 | Chapter 3
Conduct the interview in a competent and courteous manner.
◾
Remember,
you are in control and the success of the session depends on you, not the
respondent. Make sure you do the following:
• Arrive on time.
• Introduce yourself.
• Explain the purpose of the
interview.
• Stay on track; stick to the topic.
• If interviewee speaks off
topic, be prepared to pursue
unexpected and interesting
topics by asking follow-up
questions.
• Take notes, but not excessively.
• Listen attentively.
• Ask for clarifi cation or more
complete details if needed.
• Dress appropriately.
• Speak in a clear, distinct voice.
• Be assertive but not arrogant.
• Avoid small talk.
• Thank the respondent for his
or her time.
• Offer a handshake as you
leave.
• Add a more complete summary
to your notes as soon as you
leave.
Observation
In addition to surveying and interviewing, observing is another method of
collecting primary data. Professionals frequently rely on observation to solve
problems in their jobs. Medical professionals observe patients to diagnose
illnesses. Crop scientists observe the numbers and types of weeds and
insects in a fi eld to decide whether the crop should be sprayed. Highway
departments count vehicles to decide where to place traffi c signals. However,
you need to be careful when gathering data by observation. Observers
may be biased, or subjects may act differently if they know they are being
studied. Further, you should strive to interpret data objectively. Do not begin
with preconceived ideas. To collect credible data by observation, use the
following guidelines:
Train observers in what to look for, what to record, and how to
◾
record. If you wanted to know about traffi c at a certain intersection,
you would train people to count vehicles; in addition, you would need
to tell the observers the rules. For example, how would they count
enclosed-bed trucks such as moving vans? If one observer counted
these trucks with passenger vehicles, another counted the trucks with
commercial vehicles, and the third did not count the trucks at all, the
data would be fl awed. Also make sure that all observers are using terms
the same way. For example, what is “peak period”? If you tell observers
that the peak period is from 11 A.M. until 2:30 P.M., their counts for peak
period will be useful data because each observer counted during the
same time frame.
Technical Research | 71
Make systematic observations.
◾
For instance, if the observers counting
vehicles work only from 7 A.M. to 9 A.M. and from 4 P.M. to 6 P.M., will you
get an accurate picture? Because many people are commuting to work and
school during these times, you are likely to get infl ated numbers.
Observe only external actions.
◾
You cannot project internal actions or
reasoning. For example, you may observe that 24 percent more people
displayed fl ags this Independence Day than last, but you cannot say that
more people are fl ying fl ags because they feel more patriotic. Report only
actions or events you can see.
Quantify fi ndings whenever possible.
◾
Being able to assign statistics adds
credibility, showing that an action or event was consistent.
Support your observations.
◾
If you cannot quantify, support
generalizations with details, examples, and illustrations. You might even
make drawings or take photographs.
While observation can be a valuable source of primary data, consider the
time, equipment, and cost. For instance, hiring and training people to count
vehicles can be time-consuming and expensive. Even if you decide to place a
mechanical device across the highway to count vehicles, it must be paid for
and it will not describe the vehicles.
Experimentation
Experimentation is the act of causing an event so that an observer can test
an assumption or a hypothesis (a statement of what the tester believes
will happen). Experiments test whether a change in one factor will cause
another factor to change. For example, if the owner of a car-cleaning
business wants to know whether his current car wax or a new product
gives the longest-lasting shine, he might polish half a car with the current
wax and the other half with the new wax. He then would check the car
periodically for shine.
Employees frequently use experiments in the workplace. Manufacturers
often test new products in limited markets to see whether the products will
be successful. Managers may compare a current operating plan in one plant
with a new plan in another plant. Researchers may gather samples of air,
water, soil, food, medicines, body tissues, or even construction materials
for testing.
As with observation, experimenters must be careful to avoid elements that
will make the experiment and its results invalid. Sometimes other factors or
variables can affect the results of an experiment. For instance, using different
cleaners on the two halves of the car would affect the results of the wax
study. Using adults for conducting clinical trials of a drug meant for children
would not provide meaningful information about how the drug will work
on pediatric patients. Therefore, when you design an experiment, try to
eliminate as many outside factors as you can.
Objectivity is very important in experimentation as well. Interpret
data collected objectively. Do not start with preconceived ideas of the
72 | Chapter 3
experiment’s outcome. And remember to use passive voice when writing
about experiments; passive voice keeps the focus on the experiment rather
than the person conducting the experiment.
Surveys, interviews, observation, and experimentation all serve as useful
tools for acquiring information, and many researchers use a combination
of those methods. Remember the stain on the wool sweater in the Warm
Up at the beginning of this section? Even an everyday problem such as how
best to clean a favorite garment may require you to interview, observe, and
experiment to fi nd a solution.
Validity and Reliability
To maintain credibility, primary researchers look for valid and reliable
data. Valid data are data that provide an accurate measurement of what an
individual intends to measure.
For example, a clothing store owner wanted to know whether her business
would attract as many customers as it did on weekdays if it were open
on Sunday. She devised a test to collect data. The Sunday she chose was
during a weekend when two big football games were being played in town
and visitors fi lled area hotels. Comparing the number of customers on that
Sunday with the number of weekday customers would not generate valid
data. The large number of visitors in town on that particular Sunday would
infl uence the results.
Reliable data are data that provide results that can be duplicated under
similar circumstances. If you explain that mixing two liquid chemicals will
create a solid, then other people can try the same test. If they follow your
procedures, the mixed liquids should solidify. Being able to repeat the test
with the same results represents reliable data.
STOP AND THINK
What are three methods of collecting primary data? Why should you plan
observations?
Technical Research | 73
Chapter 3
Review
SUMMARY
1. Researching at work involves fi nding information to help people solve
problems, make informed decisions, answer questions, and perform
many other functions.
2. Secondary data, or reports of information from someone other than
the witness or the person directly involved, are usually found in a
business, school, or public library through print or electronic means.
3. Writers must give credit for borrowed material by documenting the
source. Failure to credit others for their words and ideas means risking
reputation, employment, legal action, and fi nancial reward.
4. Writers should evaluate sources by checking publication dates, the
author’s credentials, and the author’s methods and resources.
5. As researchers fi nd useful material, they take notes using one method
or a combination of three methods—summary, paraphrase, and direct
quotation—on note cards or a computer.
6. Primary data, or information direct from the person involved, may be
collected by surveys, interviews, observation, and experimentation.
Checklist
Have I defi ned the problem or need for information?
◾
Have I considered what information I already have?
◾
Have I reviewed information available in my organization’s archives
◾
relating to my problem or need?
Have I viewed the library catalog, online when accessible or in the library
◾
when not accessible online?
Have I searched periodical indexes and databases for more recent
◾
secondary sources?
Have I relied on general reference materials, electronic or in print, for
◾
quick background information and for references to other sources?
Have I searched the Web using strategies to fi lter for useful information?
◾
Have I found the most current information?
Have I given credit, using an appropriate style system, for borrowed words
◾
and ideas unless the information is considered common knowledge or is
material in the public domain?
Have I evaluated all sources of information before using the data?
◾
Have I taken notes using summary, paraphrase, and direct quotation?
◾
Have I considered collecting primary data using surveys, interviews,
◾
observations, and/or experimentation to fi nd information not available
through other sources? Have I planned for validity and reliability?
74 | Chapter 3
Build Your Foundation
1. Compose a note card for each item.
a. On page 14 of the magazine Farm Review, Edward F. Rademacher’s
and Janet Schwartz’s article “Hog Farmers and Homeowners: Zoning
Solutions” notes that municipal and regional governments are
“legislating distance” between the farms’ waste lagoons and residential
areas. The article appears in the November 2009 issue of the magazine.
b. In her 2008 book Swine Herd Disease Management, Dr. Iyana P. Nuez
writes, “Careful record keeping and close observation are the key to
disease management.” The book is 463 pages long, and this statement
appears on page 259. The book was published by Delmar, a publisher
located in New York.
2. Paraphrase items a and b. Write a direct quotation for item c. Remember
to include documentation and an introduction or integration so that
readers will know the context from which the information came.
a. “The Center for Marine Conservation reported that volunteers scouring
ocean beaches and inland shorelines cleaned up more than 7 million
pieces of trash, including cigarette butts, bottles, cans, lightbulbs,
syringes, and plastic bags.” Found in a magazine article by Cindianne
Jernigan, “Cleaning Up,” Natural State, Volume 8, Issue 43, page 105.
b. “Yesterday the Highway Department reported approval of a plan to
open an 8.5-mile corridor between Henderson and Mount Clemmons.
However, the new road may be a little bumpy because two sections
of experimental asphalt, one designed to combat hydroplaning and
the other made of crumbled tire rubber, are being used.” Found
in a newspaper article by Bill Rogers, The Hartford Daily Trumpet
(Hartford, Illinois), August 29, 2008, page B2.
c. “Storage is so cheap now that photographers have no excuse for
not backing up their images. Arrange backup to be redundant and
automatic. Store photos in at least three ways, with one of those
being off premises.” Found in a magazine article by Dee Kay,
“Preserving Your Best Photos,” Photography Solutions, Volume 10,
Issue 12, June 2009, page 209.
3. Choose a technical or scientifi c topic (for example, taxation of Internet
sales, irradiation of food supply, or cosmetic use of Botox®). Find
fi ve sources, print and electronic, on the topic. Develop a working
bibliography with each source listed in correct MLA bibliographic form
or the style your instructor wants you to use.
4. You are calling Sanford Weiss to set up an interview about a new type
of home security system he invented. What arrangements should you
discuss with him? List three things you should cover in the phone call to
set up the interview.
5. Identify a company where you might like to work and gather information
that would help you apply for a job there. For instance, learn about
products, services, and activities. Research the way the company is
organized, its business philosophy, and its niche in the marketplace.
Write a report that would be helpful to other students who might be
interested in seeking employment there.
Technical Research | 75
Your Turn
6. Think of a subject or hobby about which you know a great deal. In a
brief essay, describe how you acquired your knowledge.
7. Find three specialized reference sources (for example, a medical dictionary
or an aerospace encyclopedia) relating to your future career fi eld or a topic
of interest. (At least one of these reference sources should be online.) List
the reference sources and a description of what each one offers.
8. Collect questionnaires for class analysis. Determine effective techniques
as well as weaknesses in the surveys’ strategies.
9. Watch a televised or video-recorded interview. Note the strategies the
interviewer uses to make the interview effective.
10. Using the same keyword, use three Internet search engines. Bring to class
the fi rst ten listings that each search showed and compare the results.
11. Go to the Help section of any Internet search engine. Learn how this
particular system works. Share what you learn with your classmates.
12. Using a full-text database available in your school or community library,
fi nd and print an article relating to your career fi eld or to a term project.
Write a summary of the article and bring the summary and the article to
class. Explain to your peers how the information in the article impacts
your professional or academic plans.
13. Choose a topic relating to your career fi eld. Search for secondary
information to provide basic background information. Write an essay
summarizing your fi ndings and prepare a bibliography.
14. Prepare questions and interview someone in your fi eld of interest. From
that person, collect information about a particular research project he or
she undertook. Ask about methods, diffi culties, and the outcome of the
research. Record your fi ndings on your sheet of prepared questions.
15. In a small group, identify an issue at your school.
a. Develop a survey to collect facts and opinions about the issue.
b. Establish your audience and administer the survey in person.
c. Tabulate the survey results.
Community Connection
16. Choose a product that your school or a community organization uses
and compare it to a similar product. Keeping that product in mind,
design an experiment to test the question. Write a report on the
experiment design, the fi ndings of the experiment, or both. Make sure
you collect valid and reliable data.
17. Identify a problem at school, in your community, or at work.
Examples:
Compared to the 55 mph speed limit, how does the 60 mph limit affect gas mileage?
How can a person use leftovers to lower his or her food costs?
How can students help their school lower electricity consumption?
a. Decide what information you need to solve the problem.
b. Determine how and where to fi nd the information.
c. Conduct the necessary research.
76 | Chapter 4
Writing Process
WRITE TO LEARN
Think of a process with which you are familiar that involves several steps
and some time to complete. The process could be anything from making a
craft or troubleshooting a computer to painting a room or learning a football
play. In one page, answer these questions about your process: What steps do
you follow? Must you retrace your steps? Are some steps more important or
enjoyable than others? How did you learn this process? Does the process get
easier the more you do it? Explain.
Chapter
Goals
Identify a writing process that suits your
◾
writing style
Plan your document
◾
Draft and revise your document
◾
Edit and publish your document
◾
Collaborate constructively with others
◾
Terms
collaborative writing,
◾
p. 79
copyediting, p. 90
◾
draft, p. 86
◾
drafting, p. 86
◾
freewriting, p. 81
◾
groupthink, p. 94
◾
planning, p. 81
◾
publishing, p. 90
◾
recursive, p. 80
◾
revising, p. 87
◾
shaping, p. 83
◾
tentative outline, p. 84
◾
writing process, p. 79
◾
Focus on Writing Process
Read the sample document on the next page and answer these questions:
Can you identify this document as an early draft? Explain.
•
For whom are the editing notes and questions?
•
What kinds of problems do the editing notes address?
•
Do you see any problems that the editing notes do not cover? Explain.
•
Do your early drafts resemble this draft?
•
What If?
The model represented an earlier or later draft?
•
The draft were handwritten?
•
The draft included comments from several readers?
•
The model were in the note-taking stage?
•
Writing Process | 77
Sample First Draft of an Introduction in a Report
Our brains begin as a single cell shortly aer concepon, and then begin dividing in a process we
call meiosis. From this process
comes a brain that has much in
common with other human brains, but is also diﬀerent. Some brains are able to think visually. Others’
have musical or linguisc talent. And others’ have athlec ability.
Their is sll much we do not know about the brian, but sciensts are learning more about it all
the me. The brain has over trillion nerve cells of two types: glial and nerve cells. The adult human brain
is a wet, fragile, pink mass—feels like play dough. It can seem to stop me by recapturing a memory. It
has enough energy to power a lightbulb.
It weigh a lile over three pounds, is
shaped like a walnut, and ﬁts into the palm of your hand. It works constantly. Represents 2% of body
weight and consumes 20% of our calories and 25 % of our oxygen. It works unceasingly. When it “thinks”
harder, it uses more fuel. It physically changes as it adapts to its enviroment.
It has moreconnecons, between cells. It forms more dendrites, between the neurons. It needs
oxygen, glucose, and water to operate. The basic structure of the brain is prey common knowledge. Its
is divided into 3 parts, the forebrain, the midbrain, and hindbrain.
Writing@Work
Andrew Yoder has been a book
production editor for Rowman
& Littlefield Publishers in
Lanham, Maryland, for
nine years. He shepherds
books through copyediting, proofreading, indexing, cover
production, and finally manufacturing. Most of his technical
communication involves e-mailing authors, freelancers, and
in-house colleagues. He also is a book author and freelance
writer and editor.
To begin a writing project, Andrew first gathers all of the
resources he needs into one electronic file, organizes the
contents of the file into smaller themed sections, and then
finds the best section with which to start. “I’ll occasionally read the quotes
[in the file] and try to think about different angles and sections while doing
mind-numbing tasks like mowing my yard.”
Recently, Andrew talked with his fellow Rowman & Littlefield editors about how
they approach writing. Each editor takes a different approach: “One colleague
said she writes out a very detailed outline that serves as a draft replacement.
Another coworker said that she doesn’t draft; she just writes. That’s me. Any
revising that I do is more like copyediting than working from a draft.”
Authors should not be afraid of the copy editor’s red pen. After Andrew sends
one of his own completed manuscripts to his copy editor, he hopes to receive
a great many questions and corrections that will improve the book. “Some
authors are offended when someone edits their work or asks questions, but
I’d rather have a copy editor find mistakes in my work than have a reader find
them.” Furthermore, says Andrew, “The biggest enemy of revising or editing
material is a large ego.”
Think Critically
1. How would your instructors react if you had outside copy editors correct
your work before you turned it in? Why is writing at school different from
writing on the job?
2. Look at the section in this chapter “Writing Is Different for Everyone”
on page 80. Why do different people use different approaches to writing
assignments?
Printed with permission of Andrew Yoder
kertlis/iStockphoto.com
78 | Chapter 4
Writing Process | 79
To read two Letters to
Students on the nature of
the writing process, go to
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 4; then click
Data Files. These letters
show that writing is diﬀ erent
for diﬀ erent people. Which
description do you relate to
most?
A PROCESS FOR TECHNICAL WRITING
So far, you’ve learned why people write at work; how to plan for audience,
purpose, scope, and medium; and how to conduct research. Now that you
are ready to write, how do you begin? Where will the words come from to
fi ll the pages of your document? They will come from completing the stages
of writing your document—the writing process. This process includes
planning, drafting and revising, and copyediting.
The writing process used by technical writers has much in common with
the writing process used by any writer—an essayist, a novelist, a journalist,
or a songwriter. However, each genre brings its own challenges. Along with
considering audience, purpose, and medium, technical writers must spend
the early stages carefully planning their writing. Working with technical
data requires thinking not only about words, but also about graphics and
page design. Furthermore, technical writers often work collaboratively.
Sophisticated software becomes an integral part of the process too. In practice,
the technical writing process builds on the writing process with which you
are already familiar.
To learn about the technical writing process, you will follow the decisions
Jenna makes as she participates in a collaborative writing project for
educators in her state. (Collaborative writing is writing with others in a
group.) Jenna, a middle school science teacher, is the team leader for a
group of instructors given the task of researching new teaching methods for
science teachers. The team will publish its fi ndings in a journal and present
them at a statewide conference.
This chapter follows Jenna through each stage of the process, from coming
up with her idea in the planning stage to polishing the fi nal paper in the
publishing stage. The sample document on page 77 shows an early draft of
the introduction to the paper. Other models in the chapter illustrate changes
Jenna made to this draft as she worked through the writing process.
Think about the last writing
assignment you completed.
Maybe it was a letter or
a report for a class. What
process did you follow? What
did you do ﬁ rst, second, third,
and so on?
Warm Up
Comstock Images/Gety Images
80 | Chapter 4
To manage the stages of the technical writing process effectively, you
should understand three characteristics of the process: It moves back and
forth between predictable stages, it requires suffi cient time to complete,
and it varies from one person to the next. If you understand how the
process works, you can customize each stage to fi t your personality and
thinking style.
Writing Is Recursive
Writing is an act of creativity, and often it does not move forward smoothly
from one step to the next. Although the overall process does progress
logically from planning to writing the fi nished product, it is a backward-
and-forward process between predictable stages; that is, it is recursive, or
circular, in nature.
For example, you plan an article about new city bus routes and begin
to write. Then you discover that you overlooked the route in your own
neighborhood. You go back to the research stage and gather more
information. Next, you hear about some citizens who are not happy with
the proposed routes. You circle back and change your purpose to refl ect
their discontent. After interviewing a few concerned citizens, you revise
the article again.
Documents change depending on which stage of the process the writer
is in. In some stages, writers expand documents, generating ideas and
words without judging their usefulness. During other stages, writers make
judgments, cutting some words and keeping others.
Writing Takes Time
Writing takes time. Most writers need a certain amount of time to let ideas
“cook” in their heads. The process can be compared to baking bread. You
gather ingredients, mix them, knead the dough, and place the dough in a
warm place to rise. However, you cannot make the dough rise; it rises in its
own time because you set the process in motion. Like the bread, your ideas
need time to incubate. The other stages take time too. It may take you two
weeks to conduct research and only one day to write a rough draft, but the
revising may take another week. When you write, you must allow time for
the process.
Writing Is Different for Everyone
While the writing process does have stages, what people do in each stage
differs from one person to the next. How people feel about the stages differs
too. Some people enjoy the prewriting and planning and dislike the revising.
Others enjoy the revising but are frustrated by the planning. Some people
let the ideas grow in their heads and write slowly with little revision. Others
write many words quickly, using many drafts.
STOP AND THINK
Explain the recursive nature of the writing process. Why does the process take
time? Why is the process different for everyone?
Writing Process | 81
PLANNING
Like other tasks, writing is easier when you have a plan. Planning is the fi rst
stage of the writing process, when a writer thinks of an idea and prepares to
develop and research it.
Choosing a Topic
Your fi rst task is to choose a topic. Sometimes your employer or instructor will
give you a topic with some guidelines. For example, a trainer in the home offi ce
of Pajoli’s Pizza franchise is asked to write an operating manual for the entire
chain. The manual includes the home offi ce specifi cations (for example, how to
open and close the restaurant, how to order, how to prepare each dish, and how
to calculate food costs). Therefore, the research plan is straightforward—interview
managers, observe them in action, and write the procedures step-by-step.
When the topic is given to you, learn as much as possible about the
assignment. Ask about audience, purpose, scope, and medium. Note any
gaps in the analysis, ask questions, and make changes based on new
information. For example, the writer for Pajoli’s manual notes that some
restaurant owners are Hispanic. Based on this information, the writer
provides a Spanish translation.
Working with someone else’s idea can simplify the planning stage. Sometimes
your writing assignment is not so specifi c. Your employer or instructor may
give you general guidelines and expect you to come up with ideas and a plan.
Freewriting, mapping, and journaling are strategies that can help you choose
a topic. For example, your assignment could be like Jenna’s. When Jenna
was given her task, she was not given a specifi c topic. Therefore, Jenna used
freewriting and journaling to help her choose one.
Freewriting
Freewriting is writing freely to discover an idea. You write what comes to
mind without judging what you have written or worrying about grammar
or sentence structure. Three variations of freewriting are open freewriting,
focused freewriting, and looping.
With open freewriting, you write about anything and see where your writing
takes you. Jenna’s open freewriting fi nally brings her to a possible topic in
the last few sentences shown in Figure 4.1.
Everybody makes plans.
People plan how to spend an
afternoon or what to wear.
They plan major events—
weddings, graduations, the
future. What are the beneﬁ ts
of having a plan? Are there
drawbacks to having a plan?
If so, what are they?
Warm Up
What am I interested in? Today, not much today. Let’s see. Okay, let’s fi nd a topic
for the research. Could write about problem solving. Hmmm. Also saw on Discov-
ery Channel a segment about the brain and learning disabilities. Hmmm. I have a
learning disability. Maybe I could research that. Yeah—why do I have a learning
disability, and what instruction works best for me? That would help instructors in
the classroom.
Figure 4.1 Jenna’s Open Freewriting
82 | Chapter 4
With focused freewriting, you choose a topic and freely associate ideas with
that topic. This exercise, too, helps Jenna discover an idea. An example of
Jenna’s focused freewriting is shown in Figure 4.2.
TOPIC: Learning: How do students learn best—with good instructors when the stu-
dents are motivated? What makes a good instructor? One who has enthusiasm, one
who knows the subject, one who knows how students learn, knows students’ learning
styles. Who was my best instructor? Mr. Kohl. But what made him good? Why do stu-
dents not learn? What happens in the brain when someone learns? Do we know the
answer to that question? Maybe if we knew how the brain learns, instructors could do
something to improve that process.
Figure 4.2 Jenna’s Focused Freewriting
With the looping technique, you write for fi ve minutes, stop, and summarize
in a sentence what you have written. Staying focused on the summary
sentence, you write again for fi ve minutes, stop, and summarize. Then you
repeat the process until ideas appear, as they do in Figure 4.3.
First Loop (write for 5 minutes): Tired, sleepy, head hurts, had a hard time paying at-
tention to the stock market seminar—too much math. I wish I had gone to the coun-
seling workshop—more my style. My sister would like this though; she is good with
math—a math whiz. Why is that? Why do some people learn some things more easily
than others? (Stop and wait a few minutes.)
Second Loop (write for 5 minutes): Why do some people learn some things more eas-
ily than others? Who else? Renee is good at karate; Jon is good with cars but dislikes
English. Why? Was Einstein’s brain different from everybody else’s? If I knew, would
it help me and others learn math? What would help me with my learning problems in
math? (Stop and wait a few minutes.)
Third Loop: Jenna could summarize the last idea and begin freewriting again to start
another loop.
I had this strange dream last night that I was late to class. Everyone was taking the
exam, and I had only 10 minutes to fi nish it. I panicked, but then I saw three students
get up and act out one of the problems. I saw more students writing on the board. In
the back, I saw students talking in a group. Suddenly, the class became three classes—
you know how weird dreams can be. Somehow I knew these students were learning.
What does that mean? Maybe that people learn in different ways. There must be some
kind of brain research on it.
Figure 4.3 Jenna’s Looping Technique
Figure 4.4 Jenna’s Writing Journal
Journaling
Another way to fi nd an idea is to write in a journal regularly. Figure 4.4
shows a journal entry that Jenna wrote one morning.
Writing Process | 83
Jenna notes that in several of her entries, she has come back to the question
of what happens in the brain when people learn. Because she does not know
much about brain research, she decides that she would like to know more
about it. At this point, she selects brain-based teaching as a possible topic.
Shaping an Idea
After you choose a topic, you begin shaping the topic by giving it some
direction. When you are shaping an idea, you must answer several questions:
Is the idea narrowed or focused enough? How can I develop this idea? What
are the subtopics or parts of the idea? How can I organize these subtopics?
Questioning, reading, mapping, and outlining will help you focus your idea
and fi gure out subtopics.
Questioning
Jenna uses questioning to shape her idea. Who will benefi t from learning about
this topic? Clearly, instructors can benefi t, but what do they need to know?
When and where can they use this information? Why does learning take place?
How can instructors improve classroom learning? After asking these questions,
Jenna decided that the “why” and “how” answers were important for shaping
her idea. She also approaches her colleagues to get their points of view.
Reading
Jenna found some direction from the reading journal she kept as she read
about her topic. She tagged some pages with sticky notes when she found
information that would help her shape her topic. An example is shown in
Figure 4.5.
“Improving Our Classrooms” article: Talks about how windows of opportunity for
learning open and close in the growing brain. Example: The neurons for learning lan-
guage are active until about age 10. After that, neurons not used die out.
How the Brain Learns by Sousa: Sousa stresses how the brain constantly adjusts to its
environment. Gives many teaching suggestions for the classroom.
Figure 4.5 Additional Research Notes from Jenna’s Reading Journal
Mapping
Jenna used cluster mapping to shape her ideas. She began with her topic
in the middle and allowed ideas to radiate from the center, drawing lines to
connect related topics. As she listed topics, her list grew into other clusters
and generated more ideas for topics. Jenna could then see at a glance the
major ideas, their subtopics, and the relationship of the subtopics to the
major ideas. For example, she could see that the amount of sleep that
students get and the instructor’s method of delivery affect retention. She also
could see the need to clarify the differences between retention and learning.
You can view Jenna’s cluster
map at www.cengage.com/
school/bcomm/techwtg. Click
the link for Chapter 4; then
click Sample Documents.
84 | Chapter 4
After looking closely at the cluster, Jenna knew she had to narrow her choices
and decide which subtopics to include and which to omit. Not all of the ideas
were relevant to her purpose, that is, to facilitate learning in a middle school
classroom. She decided not to include learning disabilities because most
schools have disability support programs where readers can get information
on that topic. She also decided to leave out early brain development.
Outlining
From the cluster map, Jenna used a tentative outline. This outline is an
informal, changeable plan for organizing topics and subtopics. Notice that
the outline in Figure 4.6 is not a formal one, yet it gives Jenna a focus for her
paper’s topics and subtopics.
View the formal and informal
outlines at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link for
Chapter 4; then click Sample
Documents.
Figure 4.6 Jenna’s Tentative Outline
As you outline topics, consider how to organize them. The document type may
dictate the organizational pattern. You can use these organizational patterns to
suit the document’s purposes. Consider the following organizational patterns:
Chronological order
◾
for things that must progress from fi rst to last, as in
the development of a product or the history of an event
Spatial order
◾
for arranging items in space, as in a description of an offi ce,
a factory, a landscape design, or a home
Cause-to-effect order
◾
(or effect-to-cause order), as in a presentation of
reasons for an event or the consequences of an action
Comparing and contrasting,
◾
as in the recommendation of one product or
action over another
Classifying
◾
or breaking something down into parts, as in an analysis of
venture feasibility or product usefulness
Problem and solution,
◾
as in a defi nition or an analysis of a problem
followed by a workable solution
Introduction—some interesting facts about the brain—to get students’ attention
–Basic Brain Anatomy—explain basic parts of the brain and what each part does
–How neurons work—how a neuron fi res and passes information from one to another
– Relate basic brain anatomy and neurons’ fi ring to how the brain learns (Show the
actual changes in brain anatomy)
–Retention—what factors affect retention?
1Amount of sleep
1Timing of information presented
1Rehearsal
2Type of rehearsal
2Length of rehearsal
Writing Process | 85
Other ways to organize data include strategies that meet your readers’ needs
as well as your purpose for writing. These strategies include the following:
General to specifi c
◾
(or specifi c to general). Does your audience need the big
picture or the details fi rst?
Background before
◾
new information. Do
the members of your
audience need to know
how something happens
or happened before they
accept new information?
Familiar to less familiar.
◾
Are you presenting
your readers with new
information following
something familiar that
will be easier for them to
understand?
Simplest to most complex
◾
(or most complex to simplest). Do your readers already understand the
complex ideas, or do they need to be led to them logically?
Most important to least important
◾
(or least important to most important).
Will your audience benefi t from reading the most important idea fi rst or last?
Often using one organizational strategy is not enough. Longer, more
complex documents may require one section to be organized differently from
another section. In such cases, a combination of methods works best. Jenna
considers using a combination of methods for her document, as follows:
Problem and solution:
◾
Jenna presents the problem of lower science
achievement and offers brain-based teaching as a solution.
Cause-to-effect order:
◾
Jenna plans to develop her argument with the
reasons instructors should change lesson plans and the effects those
changes may have on student learning.
Background before new information:
◾
Jenna believes that instructors need
to understand the newest research about the brain before she presents the
teaching strategies based on that research.
Simplest to most complex:
◾
Because instructors are busy, Jenna plans
to introduce simpler ideas fi rst, which can be incorporated quickly into
lesson plans, before moving on to strategies that require more time to
implement.
Consider what headings (short titles in a document that identify a topic) you
will use and what the fi nal document will look like. A heading is appropriate
when you have several paragraphs that relate to a single topic and that will
likely come from the outline you wrote. The document type—a report, a
resume, a brochure—also will dictate your headings. After reviewing her
tentative outline, Jenna converts her topics to a parallel structure and plans
to use the headings shown in Figure 4.7 on the following page.
biffspandex/iStockphoto.com
86 | Chapter 4
How the Brain Is Structured (fi rst-level heading)
How Neurons Create Memories (fi rst-level heading)
How Brain Structure and Activity Affect Learning (fi rst-level heading)
How to Aid Retention (fi rst-level heading)
Amount of Sleep (second-level heading)
Timing of Information Presented (second-level heading)
Amount and Type of Rehearsal (second-level heading)
DRAFTING AND REVISING
Now that you have a plan and information about your topic, you are ready
to write. This part of the writing process is called the drafting and revising
stage. Review your audience analysis and purpose for writing. Keep your
audience and purpose in the back of your mind as you draft and revise.
Drafting
Drafting is the second stage of the writing process. When drafting, you write
the fi rst, second, and third (or more) versions of your document. As soon
as you begin to write, you are writing a fi rst draft—an early version of a
document that is subject to change. Do not put off writing because you are
waiting for that perfect fi rst sentence to come to mind. Just start writing. The
order in which you write does not matter. What does matter is the order in
which the reader reads. Force a few words until they start to fl ow. Drafting is
like trying new paint: you do not know whether you like the color until you
see it on the wall.
The Introduction
While the introduction might not be the fi rst part you write, it is the fi rst part
your readers will see. It sets the tone and determines how receptive your
readers are to the information you present. Use the introduction to:
Relate to your readers.
◾
Discuss a situation that you and your readers have
in common.
Hold your readers’ attention.
◾
Give startling statistics or an eye-opening
quotation.
STOP AND THINK
What strategies for freewriting and shaping have you used in the past? Which
ones work best for you? Does this chapter present some methods you have not
tried? If so, which ones?
Figure 4.7 Jenna’s Tentative List of Headings
Do you have diﬃ culty writing
the ﬁ rst words in a draft, or
do the words come fairly
quickly? How long does it
take you to write a two-page
ﬁ rst draft on a familiar topic?
Warm Up
Writing Process | 87
Forecast
◾
the topics and information you will cover.
Identify questions
◾
that are answered in the document. List the questions.
Identify the problem to be solved.
◾
Defi ne the problem.
Give the background
◾
of the situation. Present events that lead to the
need for the document or research.
Give a research overview.
◾
Give the major headings. Explain where and
how the research was conducted.
The Body
As you write, you decide how to support your subtopics in the body of your
paper. When thinking about ways to elaborate, explain, or prove your points,
ask yourself what your readers need. Do they need:
Long or short examples—specifi c occurrences that happened or could
◾
happen?
Testimonials—real-life stories from people who can attest to or support
◾
a view?
Quotations—statements from people who are often authorities on a
◾
topic?
Statistics—numerical data, percentages, and/or test results to support a
◾
view?
Historical facts—verifi able information researched by credible scholars?
◾
Financial facts or estimates—fi nancial reports, trends, and/or economic
◾
news?
The Conclusion
Use your conclusion to do what the document type requires. Proposals may
need a reminder of the solution; sales letters may need a call to action; a
recommendation may need a summary of key points and a possible decision;
a research paper may answer questions posed earlier in the document.
Revising
When you fi nish drafting, you revise your document. When revising, you
read your document and make changes to content, organization, and word
choice. Use your audience analysis and purpose statement to guide you.
Because the content affects the other revision strategies, start with the
general content and move to the details.
After you print a fi rst draft, put it aside for a while. Come back to the
draft at a later time and read it again to decide what does and does not
work. Make notes on the draft. Draw arrows when you see, for example,
that paragraph 3 should be next to paragraph 6 and that the example in
paragraph 2 should be in paragraph 5. Cross out phrases, sentences, and
paragraphs that can be deleted.
Writing can be an untidy process, as Figure 4.8 on the next page illustrates.
This document is the second draft of Jenna’s introduction.
88 | Chapter 4
Figure 4.8 Jenna’s Second Draft of the Introduction
Writing Process | 89
Review Jenna’s third revision
at www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 4; then click
Sample Documents.
Figure 4.9 provides a hierarchy of questions to ask yourself while you revise.
Notice that the questions begin with the general content and move to the
details.
STOP AND THINK
What did you find to be the three most helpful pieces of advice in this section?
Why do you find them so helpful?
CONTENT QUESTIONS FOR REVISION
Do I have enough or too much information for my reader? Do I need to conduct
more research or delete something?
Is my information clear? Do I need to revise for clarity?
Is my introduction effective? Do I need to revise to attract my readers’ attention?
Is my purpose clear? Do I need to add a sentence that explains the purpose?
Do my details logically support my purpose?
ORGANIZATIONAL QUESTIONS FOR REVISION
Is the information in the best logical order for my reader? Do I need to move
paragraphs or sections? Are my paragraphs and sections unifi ed? Do I need
to remove sentences that do not fi t the purpose?
Do sections and paragraphs have topic sentences? Do I need to add topic
sentences?
Are transitions clear between sections and paragraphs? Do I need to add transi-
tion sentences or phrases?
Does my conclusion logically end the document?
READABILITY QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
Does my writing fl ow from one sentence and paragraph to the next?
Are sentences varied by length and type? Would my sentences be more interesting
if I combined them?
Have I selected the best words? Do I need to replace overused words? Do I need
to defi ne words?
Figure 4.9 Hierarchy of Questions for Revision
90 | Chapter 4
COPYEDITING AND PUBLISHING
How important is an error-free document? In business, a professional image
indicates a professional, responsible institution behind the image. In the
absence of a person, the document represents a company. The document
becomes the face of the company. If the face has smudges and errors, the
impression is negative. If the face is clean and attractive, the impression
is positive. Therefore, after you have planned, drafted, and revised your
document, you must take care of the fi nishing touches by copyediting and
publishing your writing. Copyediting means proofreading a document for
correctness in spelling, grammar, and mechanics. Publishing means sending
your document to the person or people who need or requested it.
Copyediting
After you have revised for content, organization, and word choice, it is time
for copyediting, one of the fi nal stages of the writing process. In this stage,
you carefully proofread your document and polish it.
Figure 4.10 lists copyediting questions to ask yourself as you correct a
document.
Use several aids when proofreading for errors. To help catch errors that you
may not notice as you read silently, read your draft aloud to catch fragments,
grammatical errors, and awkward sentences. You also can read the draft
backward, starting with the last sentence of the paper and moving toward the
beginning. In addition, if you know a good grammarian and speller, ask that
person to help you copyedit. You may be surprised at what he or she catches!
Today you can use electronic aids for copyediting. Most word processing
programs underline misspelled words as you key, alerting you to errors.
You can check the spelling and correct it as you key, or you can wait until
you fi nish the document to run the spell-checker. The checker will locate
misspelled words, fl ag instances to correct, and provide a list of possible
corrections.
What is your impression
when you ﬁ nd errors in a
newspaper or textbook?
Warm Up
Do I have any sentence problems—fragments, run-ons, or comma splices?
Is the punctuation correct?
Have I used words correctly? Have I double-checked frequently misused words?
Have I spelled the words correctly?
Is the documentation of sources accurate?
Does the document look professional?
Is the page design balanced and attractive?
Is the formatting consistent?
Figure 4.10 Copyediting Questions for Analysis
Writing Process | 91
However, the spell-checker does not select the best word for
you. For example, it does not fl ag an improper use of their or
there if the word is spelled correctly but used incorrectly. Also,
technology creates new uses for existing words for which spell-
checkers cannot check.
The grammar checker operates the same way. It fl ags sentences
that may have problems, but you must understand grammar
to know whether to change the wording. You can look up
grammar and mechanics questions in a current English
handbook.
Other electronic aids include a dictionary (for parts of
speech or meanings of words) and a thesaurus. A thesaurus
is handy when you know that a better word exists for the
one you have used or when you have overused a word and
need a synonym. However, words have subtle differences
in meaning. Roget’s Thesaurus lists steal as a synonym for
borrow, but you cannot use the two words interchangeably.
When using a word from a thesaurus, look up its use in
a dictionary. Otherwise, your use may be awkward or
inaccurate.
Publishing
When you have fi nished copyediting your document, you are ready to
publish. In this fi nal stage, make sure the document looks professional, is
ready on time, is presented in the form your reader needs, and uses sources
correctly.
Print the document on good paper, using a high-quality printer and print
cartridge or toner. To meet your deadline, have the document ready
several days ahead of time to allow for mishaps—the printer not working,
the cartridge running out of ink, or the power going out. If
you are sending a document to a print shop, know how much
time the printer needs. Include any accompanying letters and
make sure appropriate people receive copies. For documents
that require signatures of others in your organization, as
many proposals do, allow adequate time for meeting with and
requesting signatures of these busy people.
Document your sources using the proper style manual for the
discipline. Separate style guides have been developed for fi elds
such as the humanities, the social sciences, the legal sciences,
medicine, and engineering. Electronic publications, web pages,
and government publications have their own publishing
preferences. Style guides also vary by country, with different
publication guidelines for Australian English and Canadian
English, for example. Do not risk plagiarizing your document.
When in doubt, check a source.
Figure 4.11 on the next page shows the fi nal draft of Jenna’s introduction.
Compare this version with the sample document on page 77 to see the
changes Jenna made throughout the writing process.
At the Merriam-Webster online
dictionary, you can quickly look up
words and ﬁ nd deﬁ nitions, parts of
speech, and correct spelling. This
website also has a thesaurus to help you
ﬁ nd synonyms.
Choose ﬁ ve boldfaced terms from the
chapter. Then go to the NET Bookmark for
Chapter 4. Use the thesaurus to ﬁ nd one
or two synonyms for each term you chose.
Do the synonyms help you remember the
deﬁ nitions of the terms? Explain.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
TYPICAL READER
A person or people needing speciﬁ c informa-
tion presented in a well-organized, coherent
document.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Working toward a well-organized, coherent
document beginning with the idea and plan-
ning stages through the drafting, revising,
and publishing stages.
92 | Chapter 4
STOP AND THINK
What kinds of mistakes do you tend to miss when you copyedit your writing?
Make a list of those mistakes and practice looking for them in a draft.
Figure 4.11 Jenna’s Final Draft of the Introduction
Writing Process | 93
Describe an experience
when you worked as part
of a group or team. What
role did you and the others
play? What was the ﬁ nal
outcome? Could you have
accomplished the ﬁ nal
outcome by yourself? Explain.
Warm Up
Complete the Observe a
Group worksheet available at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the link
for Chapter 4; then click Data
Files.
WRITING COLLABORATIVELY
Many writing projects are done collaboratively—newsletters, proposals,
research projects, brochures, and web pages. The more complex and longer
your project, the more likely you will work with others. Often writing
produced collaboratively is better than anything anyone could have written
individually. Interdependence is necessary in today’s work environment. You
are stronger when you use others’ strengths along with your own.
The topic of your writing project may require the input of people from
several disciplines. Each person brings a special area of expertise to the
project—whether it is medical, technical, political, or socioeconomic—or the
ability to write and design graphics. Applying for a grant to aid a hospital in
a rural community might involve the following people:
Chief Surgeon Dr. Emily Coltrain
Hospital administrator Ray
Guevara
Two members of the hospital’s
board of trustees (an educator
and a prominent business leader)
City council member Julia McNeil
Senator Colin Elkins
Architect Holden Wacamau
Professional grant writer Paula
Solinski
to address medical needs and
equipment
to address hospital and
equipment costs
to represent community
concerns
to represent city and local
business concerns
to foster political support
to design the hospital trauma
center requested in the grant
to gather data from different
areas to write, revise, edit, and
publish the grant
A collaborative effort may be required not only for a long document, but also
for a short piece of writing. A monthly departmental newsletter, for example,
may include short articles from different employees with one editor putting
the newsletter together—much the same way a newspaper editor collects
articles from reporters.
Advantages of Collaboration
Employees pool their resources because collaboration works. Why?
Collaboration works because it does the following:
Brings together different knowledge.
◾
In this age of specialization, no one
person has all of the answers. The more knowledge you can tap, the more
credible your fi nal project will be.
Brings together different talents.
◾
Some people can depict information
graphically; others are better at interviewing to get information; others
write well. Members can offer the team what they do best.
94 | Chapter 4
Allows different perspectives and viewpoints.
◾
Different perspectives can
offer wisdom and balance.
Improves work relationships.
◾
During a work project, people form
friendships, empathize with each other’s work problems, and may be able
to help with solutions.
Is enjoyable.
◾
People who get along in a group and successfully produce
results have fun working with each other.
Keeps one person from being responsible for the entire project.
◾
Often
the work seems less stressful because the responsibility is shared.
Disadvantages of Collaboration
The rewards of collaboration are numerous, but not all group work
produces good results. Working in a group can have pitfalls. For instance,
collaboration:
Can be a dreaded event.
◾
While most people enjoy working in a group,
someone who does not get along with a group member may dread the
experience. Some people prefer to work by themselves, and group interaction
is frustrating for them.
Can include confl ict.
◾
However, some disagreements over content or
procedure can be productive because they encourage more talking and
thinking to reach the best outcome. Groups that learn to manage confl icts
can work through them without creating ill will.
Can take longer than people working alone.
◾
Group communication
requires more time. More time is needed to talk over solutions in a group,
collect data from different people, read drafts, and work through confl ict.
Can take away personal motivation.
◾
If someone has only a small interest
in the group project, he or she may not care about the outcome and thus
will not be productive.
Can encourage groupthink.
◾
Groupthink is the tendency of group
members to conform to the group’s preferences without thinking through
an issue individually. The danger of groupthink is that members may be
lulled into believing that they are producing a superior product when, in
reality, their unwillingness to confront tough issues produces a mediocre
product. Groupthink results when people do not care enough about the
project to risk confrontation or when people do not know how to manage
confl ict and therefore avoid it.
Can lead to unequal workloads.
◾
Some task-oriented personalities will
jump in to get the job done. Illness may keep someone else from working
on the project. Sometimes members know more about certain areas of
the project and assume more responsibility because of their specialized
knowledge. In some instances, members do not “pull their weight.”
Inequity in workloads may lead to resentment.
Can produce fragmented writing.
◾
If different parts of a document are
written by different people with little agreement on how the writing
should be organized or without a designated editor, coherence and
readability may suffer.
Writing Process | 95
Despite the pitfalls, collaboration is necessary in the workplace. People who
learn to work collaboratively show their managers and teammates that they
know how to accomplish a task with others. Many job descriptions ask for
individuals with people skills, and job interviews include questions about
the applicant’s ability to work with others. Being a team player is one of the
most important skills you can have at work.
Organizing Collaborative Projects
How do fi ve or six people write one document? A collaborative writing
project can be organized in one or more of the following ways.
Different people write different parts and use one editor.
◾
Jenna’s team eventually selected topics for the white paper
required by the grant that funded the project. Each person
wrote between 15 and 20 pages on his or her topic, as
listed below.
Brian
Jenna
Ray
Mercedes
Sudomo
Jenna
Methodology and evaluation
Brain research
Multiple intelligences
Teaching and learning styles
Technology in the classroom
Final editor
Because Jenna agreed to be the fi nal editor, team members
sent her their sections in a Microsoft® Word document. Jenna
cut and pasted their work into a longer document and made
changes to promote consistency in tone, documentation,
and formatting. She sent segments back to members asking
them to rewrite a section or to clarify their data. She received responses
and incorporated them into a single document. Then she sent the fi nal
version to everyone on the team so that each writer could make last-
minute changes. This system works well when topics can be distributed
and when people agree ahead of time on matters of style, length, purpose,
scope, and medium.
Different people submit data to a central person who compiles the
◾
information. For example, the grant writer for the rural hospital could
collect information from notes, charts, spreadsheets, interview results, and
rough drafts. She might need a letter written by the grant committee chair,
but she would write most of the draft. After writing the fi nal draft, she
would send it to committee members for their feedback.
This system works well when the writing is specialized, as in writing
grants. As a specialist in the grant-writing fi eld, Paula is a paid consultant
who knows the parameters of this grant, has experience pulling usable
data from different sources, and understands how politics affect the
awarding of grants.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Follow these tips when using a word
processing program. (1) Save your writing
often. Power surges and outages can threaten
the work you have completed thus far.
(2) Save important documents in two places.
When you have a backup, your work is safe.
(3) Save multiple drafts as Paper1 and Paper2.
You never know when you will need that ﬁ rst
draft again. (4) Make use of the Undo feature.
Think Critically
Why might some people not follow these
suggestions?
96 | Chapter 4
Different people write different stages.
◾
Writer 1 brainstorms ideas,
organizes subtopics, and determines research questions. Writer 1 then
passes this information to Writer 2, who collects the research. Writer 2
passes the plans for the document to Writer 3, who writes the fi rst draft.
Writer 3 passes the draft to Writer 4, who revises it. Writer 4 then gives
the draft to Writer 5 for fi nal editing and publishing.
A textbook chapter could be written this way, with the editor suggesting
topics, a research assistant collecting data, the author writing the chapter,
and the editor copyediting and publishing. This system works well with a
team whose members are in the same fi eld, who get along well, and who
understand the writing process.
Groups divide research tasks and come together to write.
◾
A committee
of four team members divided research investigating an institution’s
compliance with fi nancial regulations. They brought their research to
one employee’s offi ce and composed their report aloud as a group. One
team member suggested a sentence and another changed a word in that
sentence while yet another team member keyed the sentence. Everyone
gave suggestions, including the person keying the information. In two
hours, their report was written and sent to a copy editor. This system
works well for projects with a predetermined format and for people with
outgoing personalities who do not waste time haggling over word choice.
Complete the Active Listening
worksheet available at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 4; then click
Data Files.
Trust within a group is one of the most important factors in its success. Work
to create trust by following these ethical guidelines:
Be responsible. Keep your word; do what you say you are going to do.
Be loyal. Avoid talking about others in the group to other group members or
to people outside the group.
Be honest. Make sure that any research you bring to the group is properly
documented. If you do not provide a source, your entire group could get into
trouble for plagiarism.
Be respectful. Keep an open mind when individuals express opinions that are
different from yours. Practice common courtesy. Show concern for others,
say please and thank you, and apologize when necessary.
Be fair. Complete a reasonable share of work. Do not expect someone else to
do more than a fair and reasonable share and do not take credit for another
group member’s work.
Think Critically
Is it possible for these guidelines to conflict with one another? For example,
is it possible for loyalty to conflict with honesty? Explain your answer.
Focus on
Ethics
Writing Process | 97
When writing a longer document, a group may need to meet regularly. To
organize tasks for a longer document, use the fi rst meeting (or the fi rst
several meetings) to do the following:
• Create a vision
• Clarify the group’s purpose
• Analyze the audience
• Determine the scope
• Select the medium and style guide
• Set meeting times and place
• Decide on the research plan
• Set up goals and tasks
• Assign responsibilities
• Set the timeline for work
A leader or chairperson can set the meeting agendas, write minutes, keep
the group on task, and act as a spokesperson. A good leader will make
sure that everyone has a say as to what the goals should be and how the
meetings should be run. When people help make decisions, they are more
likely to support those decisions.
Using Positive Work Habits
Once meetings get under way, your leader and your teammates will count on
your participation. To be a productive group member, you need to have good
work habits and communication skills to show others that they can count on
you. To apply good work habits and contribute to the group effort, you must
do the following:
Complete your share of the work.
◾
Do whatever tasks are necessary to
help the group, whether it is making phone calls, taking notes, looking up
information, or creating graphics.
Come prepared to each meeting.
◾
Review the agenda and come with
suggestions, a notebook, a pen, or a laptop to show that you have done
your homework and know what will happen at the meeting.
Be interested in the project.
◾
Give positive feedback. Show that you care
about the fi nal outcome.
Be on time to meetings.
◾
If you cannot be on time, let your leader or a
group member know beforehand. If you are habitually late to meetings,
your group members might think you do not care about the project.
Do not take criticism personally.
◾
Remember that your goal is to produce
a good product. When someone questions your suggestions, see the
questions as a way to improve the fi nal outcome, not as a criticism of you.
If you show that you can handle constructive criticism, you will have an
easier time offering it.
Good work habits are important to building group relationships, but
communication skills are important too. Your teammates cannot read your
mind, but they can hear words and read body language. To contribute to the
success of your team, be honest and respectful in your communication.
The number one requirement for a group to work well together is trust.
The second requirement is a shared group vision and enthusiasm for the
outcome. Being a responsible group member and a good communicator will
help build trust between you and your group members.
98 | Chapter 4
Now that you understand the writing process, adaptations for collaborative
writing, and some of the strategies for effective collaboration, you are ready
to work on any writing project by yourself or with others. The more you
practice the writing process, the more adept you will become at using it to
accomplish your objectives. You also will experience the camaraderie that
comes from working with others to achieve a common goal.
Brian is a new teacher in Jenna’s research group. While the group has been
holding meetings to discuss the project, Jenna has noticed that Brian does
not seem all that interested in the project. Brian has not been doing his
share of the work when the other members ask him to make telephone calls
and look up information. He is not prepared for the meetings. In fact, when
other people talk, he doodles or stares out the window. Sometimes he skips
meetings altogether without telling anyone beforehand. His comments,
when he gives them, are negative.
Jenna thinks that Brian’s poor attitude is getting in the way of progress. She
also believes that he is frustrating the other team members, who are working
hard to make the project a success. She has already overheard some of the
members talking about what a poor team player Brian is.
Jenna is worried. She does not want Brian’s work habits to affect the final
outcome of the team.
Think Critically
What should Jenna do?
Communication
Dilemma
STOP AND THINK
Using the suggestions for good work habits, take a personal inventory of your
own work habits. Which ones produce positive results? Which ones need
improvement?
Writing Process | 99
Chapter 4
Review
SUMMARY
1. The writing process is a creative act that moves back and forth
between predictable stages, requires suffi cient time to complete, and
varies from one person to the next.
2. The fi rst stage of the writing process, planning, begins with
freewriting to generate ideas and moves to shaping to narrow a topic
and organize the ideas.
3. Shaping strategies include questioning, reading, mapping, and
outlining.
4. The second stage of the writing process is drafting and revising.
The process involves writing a draft, analyzing its strengths and
weaknesses, and revising the draft. The drafting and revising stage
may be repeated two, three, four, or more times.
5. Writers revise drafts in a hierarchy from big to little to make changes
that affect the content and organization fi rst before they make
changes that affect sentences, words, spelling, and grammar.
6. Copyediting includes reading carefully for errors and correcting them.
Publishing presents the reader with the fi nal version, a professional-
looking document complete with sources in the form the reader has
specifi ed.
7. In today’s workplace, many writing projects are done collaboratively.
Checklist
Do I understand the writing process?
◾
Have I considered how to adjust the writing process to meet my
◾
personality and thinking style?
Have I identifi ed the planning strategies that work for me?
◾
Have I used shaping strategies to narrow my topic, generate subtopics, and
◾
organize them?
Have I read and analyzed the fi rst draft according to “big to little”—from
◾
content, organization, and sentences to words and mechanics?
Have I revised my fi rst draft?
◾
Have I written as many drafts as I need to create a well-written document
◾
that meets the needs and wants of my audience?
Have I copyedited my document to fi nd all errors?
◾
Have I published my document so that it is error-free and professional?
◾
100 | Chapter 4
Build Your Foundation
1. How is writing like one of these processes: climbing a mountain,
growing a plant, training a dog, or learning a song?
2. Listed below are the steps of the writing process. Rank them from easiest to
most diffi cult for you, with 1 being easiest and 8 being most diffi cult. Rank
them again for the time each one takes, with 1 taking the least time and
8 taking the most time. Which stage is most important? Why?
Prewriting
Researching
Revising 1
Copyediting
Shaping
Drafting
Revising 2
Publishing
3. Keep a writing journal each day for fi ve days. Write in it for 15 minutes at
a time. At the end of fi ve days, underline topics about which you might
consider writing. Choose one topic and practice mapping to come up with
subtopics.
4. Use open freewriting, focused freewriting, or looping to come up with
a topic for research. Then practice focused freewriting on your topic to
help shape the idea. Another option is to practice focused freewriting on
one of these topics: the environment, sports, music, or health.
5. Map your own writing process. Compare your process to a neighbor’s,
an instructor’s, or a family member’s.
6. Answer these questions about your writing process.
a. Where and when do you prefer to write?
b. Does the computer help or hinder your writing process? Explain.
c. How do you prepare to write? Consider such tasks as playing music,
gathering materials, making a sandwich, getting a beverage, or
organizing your desk.
d. What is the best piece of writing you ever wrote? Describe your
process. How did you know the writing was good?
e. How do you know you have fi nished revising and are ready to publish?
7. Think of as many synonyms as you can for the following words. When
you are fi nished coming up with synonyms on your own, consult a
thesaurus for additional synonyms.
circumstance
run
shirt
end
excellence
communicate
document
building
describe
pleasant
fuel
employment
8. Use a variety of ways to combine the following short sentences into
longer ones to add variety to the sentence structure. Then add a suitable
topic sentence, a concluding sentence, and an appropriate transition to
create a smoother fl ow of ideas.
Luis has been offered two jobs. One job is at the movie theater. The
other job is at the golf course. He might take the job at the movie
theater. He would work at the concession stand. He would sell popcorn,
beverages, and candy. He could take the job at the golf course. He would
work at the golf pro shop. He would sell golf balls, tees, and other
golfi ng supplies. One job pays more per hour. The golf course pays more
per hour. The golf course is ten miles from Luis’s home. The job at the
movie theater pays $0.50 less per hour. It is a block from Luis’s house.
Writing Process | 101
Your Turn
9. Write two paragraphs, one discussing what you like about writing and
the other discussing what you do not like about writing. Write one
paragraph by hand on notebook paper and the other using a word
processor. How does your writing process change?
10. Write a paragraph describing your favorite place by dictating your words
to someone else. How does speaking aloud affect your writing process?
11. Write an essay or a paragraph on a topic of your choice. After you
complete one draft, exchange papers with at least two of your
classmates. Ask them to make comments using the list of questions for
copyediting in this chapter.
12. Select one of the following topics and write a one-page essay: why
people should exercise regularly, why people should stay informed
about news events, or why people should recycle. Then practice writing
collaboratively by dividing the topic into stages. Writer 1 will prewrite
and organize three subtopics and pass the prewriting to Writer 2. Writer
2 will write the fi rst draft and pass the draft to Writer 3. Writer 3 will
revise and pass the revision to Writer 4, who will edit the revision, make
changes, and submit the fi nal draft.
13. In small groups, write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper,
expressing your views on a current event (for example, a choice of a
political candidate, the way your tax dollars are spent, or a community
concern). Individually, brainstorm ideas, organize your ideas, and take
notes. In one session, write the letter as a group. Ask one person to
copyedit the fi nal version, bringing it back to class for the group to see.
14. Think of the last time you worked on a group project with other people.
What kind of experience did you have? What were the benefi ts of
working with this group? What were the drawbacks? What could you do
differently the next time you are part of a group to make sure you have a
positive experience? Write a one- to two-page analysis.
Community Connection
15. Interview a writer in your area (a reporter, technical writer, local
novelist, or public relations expert) about his or her writing process.
Does the writer come up with topics, or does someone else provide
them? What advice, if any, does the writer have for your classmates?
Summarize the writer’s process and share your fi ndings with the class.
If possible, bring to class something the writer has written. Better yet,
invite the writer to class to talk about the writing process.
16. Help another person with all or part of the writing process for a writing
project. You might help a family member or a member of Big Brothers
Big Sisters or AmeriCorp. Coach the person through the stages of the
writing process. Write a description of your experience.
17. Interview employees in your area, asking how often they work
collaboratively, what kinds of projects they complete collaboratively, and
how they organize tasks.
102 | Chapter 5
Brief Correspondence
WRITE TO LEARN
Consider information you share with others in any work situation, whether
a collaborative paper or class project, a task you manage at home, or paid
employment. For example, do you need to schedule a team meeting or set a
deadline? Is time a factor in the communication method? Is a record of your
communication important? Is your communication usually face-to-face, over
the phone, in notes or letters, by e-mail, or through other means? With one
task in mind, write a few paragraphs about what and how you communicate.
Chapter
Goals
Identify brief correspondence
◾
Analyze and target the audience for brief
◾
correspondence
Prewrite for brief correspondence
◾
Prepare for and determine how to format
◾
text messages, e-mails, memorandums
(memos), and letters
Understand and use strategies for compos-
◾
ing good news, bad news, and persuasive
messages
Terms
block letter style, p. 121
◾
buffer, p. 124
◾
external audience, p. 110
◾
goodwill, p. 106
◾
hierarchical order, p. 117
◾
hooks, p. 127
◾
internal audience, p. 109
◾
modified block letter style,
◾
p. 121
testimonials, p. 128
◾
Focus on Brief Correspondence
Read the sample writing excerpts on pages 103–104 and answer these
questions about each document:
Where is the main idea in the memo? in the letter?
•
How is the message organized in the memo? in the letter?
•
What If?
The memo writer needed a more immediate response from the reader?
•
The letter writer were declining the student’s scholarship application?
•
Brief Correspondence | 103
Sample Memo
104 | Chapter 5
Sample Letter: Positive Message
Brief Correspondence | 105
Writing@Work
Saren Erdmann is an Information
Technology Project Manager for US
Bank. Saren’s primary responsibilities
include managing software installations
and enhancements for US Bank’s
branch locations. She identifies project
stakeholders, coordinates and runs all
project-related meetings and communications, documents each project,
and assesses risks and solutions that keep initiatives running as smoothly
as possible.
Because most of Saren’s stakeholders are located in remote offices, she
must coordinate with them via phone calls, e-mails, or instant messaging.
Saren is quick to note the dangers of miscommunication when
exchanging notes with colleagues in short digital texts. “Since the written word
can be interpreted in so many ways, it is very important to be clear,” she advises.
To write with clarity, Saren recommends keeping messages short and to the
point and using a professional tone. Her rule of thumb is that “no matter how
well you know someone, you must always maintain a level of professionalism
when sending written communication at work.” However, a little humor
carefully delivered to a friendly audience won’t hurt: “If I have been working
with someone for a long time and we have a personal relationship, my
work-related communications to them are slightly more relaxed, but still
business-appropriate.”
Project managers like Saren are agile at juggling correspondence. They
multitask, prioritize which items need an immediate response, and have a
strategy for managing items on the back burner. “I am bombarded with so
much correspondence on a daily basis that it is difficult to absorb everything
I receive right away. I am careful to archive all project documentation and
correspondence in a central location. If I need to refresh my memory or read an
original communication I missed, I can find the information in my files.”
Think Critically
1. Research the word stakeholder. What is the original meaning? How is it used
in this profile?
2. Why is clear writing so important to Saren? How does she keep her
writing clear?
Printed with permission of Saren Erdmann
Courtesy of Stephen Freas
106 | Chapter 5
INTRODUCTION TO TEXT MESSAGES,
E-MAILS, MEMOS, AND LETTERS
Communication is essential for being able to act and make decisions in the
business world. People must be able to share information. Although some
communication can take place face-to-face, a great deal of communication
is conducted through text messages, e-mails, memos, and letters. All four of
these may be used for brief correspondence. However, each one has its own
distinguishing characteristics. For instance, text messaging and e-mail are
the fastest and most effi cient means of written communication. A writer can
compose a message, send it electronically around the world, and receive an
answer almost immediately.
Unlike electronic correspondence, memos and letters take
more time. Of the two, memos are more effi cient than letters,
primarily because memos have fewer formal parts and
because they are usually directed to an audience in the same
organization as the sender. Memos also invite a speedy response.
In some situations, receivers write a response on the memo they
have received and send it back to the writers. In contrast, letters
may have many parts and may be sent by postal service or a
commercial carrier to readers outside the organization.
All brief correspondence seeks the goodwill of readers. Goodwill
is the value of doing things that create mutual admiration and
respect. It is the feeling of friendship. In addition, writers of
brief correspondence practice the principles of effective
communication.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the act of making and keeping a friend. Goodwill is a feeling of
good intentions. Effective business correspondence fosters goodwill through
its word choice and message. You can create goodwill in writing the same
way you create the bonds of a friendship.
Goodwill, like friendship, is created by being honest and polite. It is fostered
by doing what you say you will do when you say you will do it. Business
friendships grow in an atmosphere of mutual respect and trust. You also
foster goodwill by attending to correspondence as quickly as you can. In
short, you generate goodwill by treating your reader the same way you
would like to be treated.
Principles of Effective Communication
In addition to generating goodwill, brief correspondence should be helpful
to readers. Table 5.1 suggests some of the characteristics of effective brief
correspondence as well as traits to avoid in text messages, e-mails, memos,
and letters.
TYPICAL READER
A busy employee needing accurate,
complete information delivered quickly in
an easy-to-read document so that he or she
can perform a job and contribute to the
organization.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Responding quickly to convey pertinent and
accurate information that adds to the work
ﬂ ow and builds goodwill.
Imagine what the world
would be like if people could
not retain information or
share ideas. For example,
what would scientiﬁ c
knowledge be today if people
had not been able to build
on the discoveries of previous
generations?
Warm Up
Brief Correspondence | 107
Following conventional format and using standard English help make a
positive impression on your reader. To ensure that the information in your
correspondence is well organized, complete, and free of errors, reread the
document before you send it. If you are unsure whether your message is
clear and easy to understand, ask a colleague to read your correspondence
and to provide feedback.
Text messages, e-mails, memos, and letters not only help get the job done,
but also serve as a way to evaluate the writer’s performance. Managers and
administrators can tell from an employee’s correspondence whether that
employee is solving or creating problems, communicating with or confusing
readers, building or ruining relationships, and getting the job done or making
no progress.
Use of Suitable Tone and Humor
Brief correspondence usually has a conversational, informal tone. In fact,
in this type of correspondence, it is appropriate to use I, the fi rst-person
pronoun. “You’re busy, so I’ll be brief” is the opening sentence of an
effective sales letter for a magazine. Note the focus on the reader, the use of
fi rst person, and the casual tone. Readers are more likely to cooperate when
the message sounds as if a person, rather than a machine, wrote it. This
informal writing style is similar to a conversation you might have with a
friend if that conversation were polished slightly.
COMMUNICATE
EFFECTIVELY AND DEVELOP
GOODWILL WITH . . .
HINDER GOODWILL AND
COMMUNICATE
INEFFECTIVELY WITH . . .
Concise language
Fuzzy, unnecessary words that take up readers’
time with details they do not need
Accuracy and completeness
Inaccurate, incomplete information, creating
misunderstandings and problems to be solved
later
Professional appearance
Sloppy appearance, making you and your
organization appear incompetent and careless
Conventional format
Unfamiliar format that confuses the reader and
makes your intent unclear
Logical organization
Illogical organization, frustrating readers’
efforts to follow your thinking
Standard English usage
Grammatical and punctuation errors and mis-
spelled words, causing you and your organiza-
tion to appear uneducated and/or careless
Table 5.1
For an entertaining memo
showing eﬀ ective use of
humor, see Giving Up Your
Blood at www.cengage.com/
school/bcomm/techwtg. Click
the link for Chapter 5; then
click Data Files.
108 | Chapter 5
AUDIENCE
The readers of text messages, e-mails, memos, and letters have similar
characteristics. All of them expect the communication to be brief, to target a
specifi c reader or readers, to have a specifi c purpose, and to follow standard
format.
Some correspondence is sent to a multiple audience, and some is written
with a specifi c audience in mind. If the reader is only one person, meet
the needs of that person. Use language and information that he or she will
understand and answer questions that this reader would ask if he or she
were present. If an audience is made up of a group of readers, consider the
needs of all of them.
Regardless of how well you know your readers, use the table on page 29 in
Chapter 2 to help you focus on your audience. If you know little about your
audience, learn as much as you can. Ask others what they know about your
audience or read correspondence your audience has written. If you cannot
learn much about your audience, assume a serious
or neutral tone.
Keep your language moderately simple and natural. Work especially hard to
build goodwill.
Audience for Text Messages
Text messages are becoming more acceptable as a form of business
communication, primarily because of the speed with which senders and
receivers can deal with information. Because readers may be internal
or external to the writer’s organization, the writer may know a great
deal, a little bit, or almost nothing about the reader. Therefore, senders
must anticipate expectations of the audience, particularly the readers’
expectations as to how formal the message should be. An employee may
STOP AND THINK
What is goodwill? Why is it important? Is a formal tone ever appropriate for
brief correspondence? Explain.
Imagine writing an e-mail or a
note ﬁ lled with private jokes,
insider stories, or juicy gossip
to your closest friend. Now
imagine that message being
misdirected to your parent,
guardian, or instructor.
Warm Up
Use humor to create goodwill in diffi cult situations or with uncooperative
audiences. For example, a club leader at school might use humor to convince
students to volunteer to donate blood even if they have not donated before
or are afraid to do so.
However, writers should be cautious about using humor. As useful as it
can be, humor used carelessly may be harmful. For example, a manager
whose daughter died in a work-related accident is not likely to laugh when
her quality assurance offi cer writes that the government safety inspectors
“are going to kill us.” Consider audience, situation, and character of the
relationship before deciding whether to use humor.
Brief Correspondence | 109
send a text message with incomplete sentences and extensive abbreviations
(for example, B4 for “before” or NRN for “No reply necessary”) to a
supervisor. If that supervisor does not approve of such informality and does
not understand the message, the communication is likely to be strained
and create a poor impression. Even though text messages may be very
brief and informal, they need to be clear and to provide the reader with the
information he or she needs.
Because text messages are gaining in popularity, they are becoming not only
a personal communication tool, but also an important business avenue.
For example, Barack Obama’s presidential campaign successfully used text
messaging to “get out the vote” and to mobilize volunteers. Some advertisers
use text messages to send coupon codes and discount notices to consumers.
Used carefully, with perhaps one to three contacts per month rather than
daily, this type of marketing campaign can be effective and inexpensive.
Also remember that your audience may not be available when you send your
text. Wait a reasonable time for a response before sending another message.
In addition, keep messages brief. If you have a long, complex message, send
it as an attachment via e-mail or through some other medium.
Audience for E-mails
For personal as well as professional correspondence, e-mail has become a
common way to communicate. Readers may be inside or outside the writer’s
organization. Thus, writers know some readers well and others not at all.
Because readers often receive a great deal of e-mail in a day, they expect
writers to focus on a point and to keep the message brief without omitting
essential information. Readers expect messages to be relevant and clear.
They will not waste their time with messages that are incomplete, confusing,
or unclear.
Audience for Memos
Memos are used to correspond inside an organization. Therefore, the reader
will be a receiver inside the writer’s organization—an internal audience.
In an organization, everyone is likely to receive and read memos. For
example, an employee might receive a memo from a coworker explaining a
procedural change. A memo outlining the facts—implementation time, date,
actions, and checklist—provides a written record so that the person receiving
the notice does not become confused about the details of what is expected.
Even though memos are addressed to people inside a company, the writer
must consider his or her audience carefully. The audience may consist of
people with a variety of outlooks, backgrounds, opinions, interests, roles,
and levels in the organization. Sometimes the writer will know the readers
and sometimes not.
Remember that the internal audience of an international company may have
members in Los Angeles and Moscow, for example. Once a writer identifi es
the audience, he or she must study the audience thoroughly to ensure that
its needs are met.
110 | Chapter 5
Audience for Letters
While memos are for readers inside an organization (internal
communication), letters are generally for readers outside an organization
(external communication). Although you may know a great deal about
members inside your organization, you may know very little about readers
outside your company, called an external audience.
A letter is an extension of your organization. The letter will be in the
presence of your reader when you are not. If the letter is well written, you
will make a good impression and inspire confi dence in yourself and your
organization.
STOP AND THINK
What are the primary differences among audiences for text messages, e-mails,
memos, and letters?
Think about the planning
involved in hosting a party or
preparing a meal. What kind
of party or meal might result
if you do not plan? Likewise,
how eﬀ ective can your
correspondence be if you do
not plan?
Warm Up
PREWRITING
Effective text messages, e-mails, memos, and letters depend on planning.
After analyzing your audience, you need to make decisions based on what
you have learned. Ask yourself these questions before you write:
What do I want the receiver to do or think after he or she reads this
◾
correspondence?
What do I want to accomplish with this message?
◾
What is the main point?
◾
Does my reader need background information? If so, how much?
◾
Do I need to make the message simpler for this audience? What defi nitions
◾
or explanations will the audience need?
Is this reader familiar with the subject matter? Does the reader have
◾
previous experience with this idea?
What questions should my correspondence answer?
◾
In addition to answering the questions above, you should take notes on the
details you need for your correspondence. Gather the facts, such as situation
background, events that occurred, problems created, order/part numbers,
accurate descriptions, or questions to ask. Find out the name, title, and correct
spelling and address of the person to whom you are writing. Double-check to
make sure the information you have gathered is accurate and complete.
Using the answers to these questions, put your ideas on paper. Some writers
prefer a list, such as the kind a person makes for grocery shopping. Other
writers like to use freewriting. Remember that freewriting is writing down
everything that comes to mind. Because this is the creative part of writing,
you should not be critical of your ideas. Get all of the ideas, brilliant or
otherwise, on paper.
Brief Correspondence | 111
Whichever technique you use will generate a collection of ideas you want
to cover in the message or body. With all of the ideas before you, you can
start to be critical. Cut the ones that are unnecessary and change those that
do not communicate exactly what you want to say. Prewriting also is the
time to rank ideas. Consider your purpose and the organization that will
best help you achieve it. Decide what you will place fi rst, second, third,
and so on.
Planning Text Messages and E-mails
Prewriting for text messages and e-mails involves planning to communicate
with readers who have diverse needs and expectations. First, remember that
busy professionals may receive a great volume of correspondence. Thus,
your subject line must be specifi c and descriptive. It should show readers
how the topic relates to them. If your subject line is poorly written, chances
are the receiver will delete your message without reading it.
Second, consider the reader’s expectations for formality and length. If you
are sending a text message or an e-mail to people in your company or
organization, you are likely to know the formality they expect by referring to
other e-mails. For instance, the corporate climate may be formal, in which
case readers might expect complete sentences, correct punctuation, and few
or no abbreviations. Likewise, review other text messages and e-mails to
determine the appropriate length of your messages.
However, others with whom you communicate electronically may be
more comfortable with informal messages—incomplete sentences; little
punctuation; and the many abbreviations writers have developed to make
online exchanges fast, such as BTW for “by the way” and HAND for “Have
a nice day.”
To see commonly used text
and e-mail abbreviations, go
to www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 5; then click
Data Files.
©Alex Hind, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
112 | Chapter 5
In addition to level of formality, plan the length of your messages to meet
readers’ needs and expectations. Most cellular carriers such as AT&T and
Verizon limit the number of characters that may be used in a text message.
When planning, keep that limitation in mind as well as the frustration your
receiver would experience in trying to read a long message on a phone.
Likewise, because people generally read e-mail from a computer screen
rather than printing hard copies, keep your messages as brief as possible
so that people can read the text without scrolling through several pages.
Short messages also allow for easier response. If you have a long, involved
message, send it as several different text messages or e-mails. Another option
is to create a document with a word processor and send the document as an
attachment.
Third, plan for differences in e-mail software. Avoid complex formatting
such as bulleted lists, tables, italics, or underlining unless you know that the
recipient’s software can read them.
Fourth, clearly explain the context of your message so that all readers will
understand. For example, when you respond to a question, make sure
readers realize which question you are answering.
Also consider privacy and security, especially when planning text messages
and e-mails. Little electronic communication is truly private. Employees
using company computers to send e-mail should keep in mind that the
e-mail belongs to (and represents) the company. Even people e-mailing
from their homes may not have the privacy they expect because of hackers,
worms, and viruses. In addition, people who use Forward, Reply All, and
Blind Copy with e-mail should be particularly sensitive to the privacy of
others with whom they correspond. For example, Dale sends a message that
he thought was private to Jin-ho, but Jin-ho forwards the message to Neva.
As a result, Dale’s privacy was compromised because Neva now knows
something Dale did not want her to see.
You are sitting at your desk at Phoenix Fabrication when you receive an
e-mail from an old friend, your former college dorm mate. He wants to
know how you have been and whether you plan to attend the upcoming class
reunion. Because you have not seen him in a couple of years, you want to
make plans to meet at the reunion.
Just when you are about to tap “Reply,” you remember that your boss
cautioned you about using company time to conduct personal business. You
think that perhaps this one quick personal e-mail will not be a problem, and
you do not want your college friend to think you are ignoring him. (He did
contact you at work first.) After all, how will anyone know you sent the e-mail?
Think Critically
How should you reply to your friend? Explain.
Communication
Dilemma
Brief Correspondence | 113
In addition, plan for handling emotions effectively. Do not fl ame. (When
writers are harshly criticizing each other, they are fl aming.) Avoid e-mailing
when you are angry. Wait until you can handle the issue logically rather
than emotionally. Using all capital letters generally equates to shouting,
so use this style only when you intend to shout. For emphasis, you can
surround a word or phrase with asterisks or white space.
Another way to convey feelings is through the use of emoticons, symbols
created on the keyboard to convey emotions, such as :-), the smiley
face. Yet writers must carefully consider how readers will react to the
feelings expressed in an e-mail because feelings can be misinterpreted or
misunderstood.
Finally, learn about good manners and etiquette in cyberspace, also known
as netiquette. Keep in mind, though, that rules of etiquette may vary from
one media to another. For example, abbreviations may be approved for some
business uses of instant messaging but discouraged for use in other media.
Table 5.2 lists some of the rules of netiquette.
DO
DON’T
Read and respond to e-mail promptly. If
you need time to reply, respond to say
that you received the message and tell
when you will reply.
Write long, complex messages; readers
expect e-mail to be brief.
Represent yourself and others well and
fairly.
Write anything that you would not say
in front of any person, including those
people discussed in the e-mail.
Communicate as clearly and rationally as
possible. Remember that readers will not
have your tone of voice or body language
to help them interpret your meaning.
Include offensive, obscene, or illegal
content.
Keep the correspondence thread when
replying so that readers will be able to
follow the line of discussion.
Quote large blocks of irrelevant text.
Develop a descriptive, precise subject line
so that readers can predict the message,
file the correspondence, and find it later.
Key in all capital letters (seen as
shouting) or in all lowercase letters
(perceived as lazy).
Keep your virus protection current so you
do not to forward problems to others.
Believe or forward every urban legend
and cybermyth that comes your way.
Respect others’ bandwidth and download
times.
Forward jokes and chain messages
without being certain that the recipient
wants them.
Table 5.2
114 | Chapter 5
Planning Memos
As with planning text messages and e-mails, prewriting memos
requires writers to consider the audience’s expectations. Readers
usually expect memos to be brief and to cover one topic.
However, the need to be brief should not override substance.
Make sure the memo explains the topic fully—whether it offers
a solution to a problem, outlines a change in procedures or
policies, or deals with other business concerns.
Furthermore, writers sometimes choose to write memos as
documentation (proof) of discussions, decisions, or actions.
Perhaps you or your company would like something more
substantial or concrete than e-mails to back up an offer that
was made during a meeting with a vendor or an action that
was taken following a safety review. Memos would serve that
purpose.
You should plan to include all of the specifi c details—for
example, names, dates, times, and locations—that your audience
may need.
Planning Letters
Memos as internal correspondence may, in some circumstances, be informal.
In other circumstances, memos may be formal. Letters, on the other hand,
are usually formal. Because letters typically address external audiences, letter
writers should inform the reader of all relevant information.
For instance, the reader may not be as aware of history and background as
other readers inside the organization are. The reader is not likely to know
insider language, or jargon. The reader may not be aware of corporate
policies, organizational culture, chain of command, or other elements that
are important in understanding the issues being discussed. In addition, when
a writer is communicating with an unfamiliar audience, the writer should
“put his or her best foot forward” by carefully choosing words, gauging tone,
and focusing on the purpose of the correspondence.
When letters are used internally for special circumstances such as
promotions, dismissals, recommendations, or disciplinary matters, writers
should plan for a higher level of formality because of the importance of the
subject and the legal implications. In general, formal documents do not use
the following:
Contractions
◾
◾Conversational speech
Clichés
◾
◾Abbreviations
Personal or emotional
◾
◾Short, simple sentences
commentary
To learn about writing processes
for many types of correspondence,
including business letters, e-mails, and
memos, check out Writing Guides at
Colorado State University’s online writing
center, Writing@CSU. Articles about
business writing, checklists to guide your
writing, and more are available.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 5
and read the information about joining
LISTSERV groups. What advice does the
site oﬀ er to young professionals joining
a LISTSERV?
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
STOP AND THINK
Why are e-mail privacy and security issues important to consider when
prewriting?
Brief Correspondence | 115
FORMATTING
In much the same way fancy type identifi es a formal invitation, the
formatting features of text messages, e-mails, memos, and letters help
readers recognize the type of correspondence they are viewing. Specifi c
elements are unique to each type. For example, text messages, because they
are viewed on a phone screen, are usually brief and simple blocks of text.
E-mails may look like memos, but they typically include e-mail addresses
for the sender and receiver. Memos are recognizable by their headings (To,
From, Date, and Subject). Likewise, the mark of a letter is the inside and
return addresses, salutation, and complimentary close—features that are
familiar to audiences.
Formatting Text Messages and E-mails
Writers usually do not need to be concerned about formatting decisions
when they create text messages and e-mails because the cellular and e-mail
software providers have already made most of the decisions. Most programs,
such as Microsoft® Outlook Express®, simply ask the writer to click a light-
colored line or a blank box and key the intended receiver or subject line.
Most programs automatically insert the sender’s name or address and date.
Formatting Memos
A draft of a memo begins with a standard format of headings followed by
the body, or message. Like the addresses and salutation in a letter (Dear
Mr. Najafi ), headings make a document recognizable as a memo. Four
elements appear at the top of a memo, as shown in Figure 5.1.
However, in some cases, headings may not appear in that order. When you
begin work, your new employer may give you a style manual that shows you
a different format the company prefers.
Memo templates are included in most word processing software. Microsoft®
Word 2007, for instance, provides several memo templates and a wizard to
help writers create memos. The advantages of working with memo templates
are that they are simple to use (even for writers with no experience), are
easily modifi ed, and provide attractive document design.
At the same time, these familiar templates have a number of shortcomings,
such as overused design (readers will likely recognize the template) and
Think about the information
readers want to know when
they receive messages. What
are their questions? Compare
that answer to the elements
of formatting for e-mails,
memos, and letters.
Warm Up
Figure 5.1 Memo Headings
TO:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
116 | Chapter 5
decisions made without the writer’s input or consideration. Because writers
do not need to think about design or headings, sometimes these “plug-and-
play” templates encourage writers not to think about other decisions related
to their message. Ineffective communication may be the result.
TO Line
In the TO section, you name your audience. You may name one person,
such as Joanna Tschiegg, or you may name a group, such as the Employee
Benefi ts Committee or the Sterile Manufacturing Division. On occasion,
you may need to name several readers who are not connected by a unit or
committee. In this case, you may simply list their names.
The list of receivers’ names may be presented a couple of ways. When you are
sending a memo to more than one person, key all names on one line, connecting
them with commas, or key the names in a list, as shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.3 Format of TO Line with Distribution List
When you are sending a memo to a large number of people, use a
distribution list. This format is shown in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.2 Formats of TO Line
TO:
Alec Abernathy, Reanna Braxton, Hector Cruz
FROM:
Anita Delmonico
Anita Delmonico
TO:
Alec Abernathy
Reanna Braxton
Hector Cruz
FROM:
Anita Delmonico
Anita Delmonico
TO:
IT Supervisors
FROM:
Porter Harrington
Porter Harrington
Distribuon List
Delonte Alston
Daniel Baron
Toyomi Narita
Omar Moya
Brief Correspondence | 117
When you list several people’s names, enter them in alphabetical order or
hierarchical order, from the top to the bottom of the organizational chart. In
hierarchical order, the people of greatest recognition and responsibility in the
organization, such as the president and vice president, are listed fi rst. Other
employees are listed in decreasing order of rank within the organization.
Remember, however, if the hierarchal list contains two employees of
the same rank, such as two directors, you should place their names in
alphabetical order so as not to offend either person.
FROM Line
After the FROM heading, you list the name or names of the sender of the
message. If you are the only person responsible for the message, your name
appears. If the memo comes from a group, the group or unit name is listed,
such as FROM: Wooster Jazz Band.
Some memos are from several people who are not part of a group. In
this case, list the names of each sender in a line joined by commas or in
columns, again in alphabetical or hierarchical order. Remember to write your
initials or sign your full name after the keyed name in the FROM section, as
shown in Figure 5.3.
Initialing or signing memos is especially important when they deal with
important legal or organizational matters. Memos become legal documents
that can be used in a court of law when they are signed and dated. Your
initials or signature also tells the reader that you have reviewed the memo and
accept responsibility for the message, particularly if someone else keyed it.
Dateline
The dateline usually appears after TO and FROM and before the subject line.
You can choose between two styles for writing the date: international (also
called military in the United States) or traditional.
International date style is becoming increasingly popular in technical documents
because of economy. International style requires no commas. In this style, the
deepblue4you/iStockphoto.com
118 | Chapter 5
writer gives the day fi rst, the month next, and the year last, as in 12 May 2012.
Another reason for its increasing popularity is that it is more clearly understood
by readers outside the United States, most of whom use this style.
The traditional month-day-year style used in the United States, as in June 4,
1955, and April 1, 2011, gives the month, the date, a comma, and the year.
Subject Line
In most memos, the subject line logically appears as the last of the
headings. It announces the point of the memo immediately before you
develop that point. You may see terms such as Reference, Regarding, or Re
(which comes from the Latin res, meaning “thing” or “matter”) used the
same way as the word subject. However, some readers consider those terms
archaic. In addition to helping the reader predict the topic, the subject line
distinguishes one message from another and focuses the writer on one
main idea.
Predict The subject line should allow readers to predict what the memo
will say. In other words, it refl ects the main idea discussed in the body. Be
as specifi c as you can when composing the subject line. A subject line that
reads “Insurance” does little to help the reader predict what the memo will
cover. That subject line is too general to provide insight. “Dental Insurance
Open Enrollment Period Set for June 20–27, 2010” is precise enough to tell
readers what to expect and to encourage them to read the message. Make the
wording as specifi c as possible, as in the following examples:
Use Minutes of Strategic
instead of
Minutes or Meeting
Planning Meeting
Use Questions about
instead of
Questions or Requisitions
Requisitions
Use Incident in the
instead of
Incident in Carpentry Shop
Carpentry Shop on May 4
The subject line should not be a complete sentence, but a phrase or a
clause—more like a newspaper headline.
Distinguish In addition to helping the reader predict the subject of the
memo, the subject line should clarify the difference between one memo and
many others. For instance, servers at a restaurant may read many memos
during the year that deal with menu items. Therefore, if the subject line says
only “Menu Changes,” the server reading it will not immediately know that
this message is different from last week’s memo. Instead, specifi c subject
lines such as “Italian Items Added to Menu for June” or “Lobster Price
Increase” or “Salmon Unavailable Until April 20” tell the server exactly what
to expect the message to cover.
Focus The subject line also aids the writer. Writing a subject line forces the
writer to focus on the most important idea. Furthermore, it allows the writer
to check the message of the memo against the subject line. The message
should cover the same idea the subject line announces.
Brief Correspondence | 119
A memo should cover only one main point. Writers who have two
messages for the same audience should write two memos for the following
reasons. First, if a memo has more than one message, the reader cannot
determine what is truly important. Second, the busy reader may find
the first idea, assume that it is the only important information, and stop
reading. Third, the memo might be so long that it intimidates readers.
Readers generally expect memos to be one to four paragraphs long.
Finally, some messages are inappropriate to combine, as Figure 5.4
illustrates.
Formatting Letters
All letters share a similar format. They are constructed using basic parts and
may be written in one of several styles.
Letter Parts
On the next page, Figure 5.5 illustrates and describes the basic parts of a
letter: heading, dateline, inside address, salutation, body, complimentary
closing, signature, and reference initials.
Figure 5.4 Ineffective Memo with Two Main Ideas
TO:
X-ray Department
FROM:
Hannah Smith, Personnel Oﬃcer
DATE:
June 10, 20—
SUBJECT:
1.
Vacaon and Sick Leave Slips
2.
Death of Mr. Marn’s Mother-in-law
1.
Please ensure that all vacaon and sick leave slips for this ﬁscal year (July 1, 20— through June
30, 20—) are turned in to Tammy by June 27, 20—.
2.
Dan Marn’s mother-in-law and Selma Hale’s grandmother, Mrs. Sadie Harper, passed away on
Sunday, June 9, 20—. Funeral arrangements are being handled by Belvedere’s Funeral Home at 2 p.m.
on Tuesday, June 11. You may send expressions of sympathy to
Dan at:
811 E. Cooper Street
Selma at:
Route 1, Box 32
Aberdeen, SD 57401
Aberdeen, SD 57401
js
Distribuon List
Dr. Mendoza
Dr. Joyner
Mr. Umezaki
Ms. Shankowski
120 | Chapter 5
INSIDE ADDRESS: Complete address of the sender as a return
address (personal business letter). A letterhead (company/
organization letter) includes the company name, logo, address, and
other optional information such and telephone and fax numbers.
DATELINE: Date the letter was written.
LETTER ADDRESS: Professional (for example, Dr., Rev., Capt.)
or courtesy title (Mr., Miss, Ms., or Mrs.), correct name (fi rst
name/fi rst initial and last name), title, and address of the person to
whom you are writing (no abbreviations). Name here should match
the name used in the salutation.
SALUTATION: Name of the person you want to read your letter.
Typically uses professional (for example, Rev., Capt., Chief) or
courtesy title (Mr., Miss, Ms., or Mrs.) and last name.
SUBJECT LINE (optional): Focuses on the topic of the letter.
BODY: Usually two to fi ve paragraphs long but can be several
pages and may use headings similar to reports. The letter should
look balanced on the page.
The body of most letters is single-spaced with a double space (one
blank line) between paragraphs. Organization depends on the type
of letter you are writing.
In block letter style, all lines begin at the left margin. In modifi ed
block letter style, all lines generally begin at the left margin except
the date and the closing lines, which begin at the center of the
page.
CLOSING: Friendly but businesslike ending. Common closings
include Sincerely, Yours truly, and Cordially (never Thank you).
SIGNATURE LINE: Keyed name and title with space for handwritten
signature above.
REFERENCE INITIALS: Initials (in uppercase) of the person
who dictated the letter followed by the initials (in lowercase) of the
person who keyed the letter. The two sets of initials may be
separated with a slash or a colon. Sometimes only the lowercase
initials are used.
ENCLOSURE NOTATION: Indicates additional documents in
the envelope. Often the word Enclosure is followed by a colon and
the titles of the enclosed documents are listed.
COPY NOTATION: Indicates that a copy has been sent to another
person or to other people.
Jeī erson Gas and Appliance
HWY 17 South
P.O. Box 11
Washington, NC 27889-1107
13 July 20—
Ms. Rhea Tankard
Manager
Malloy’s Manufacturing
1023 West Main Street
Washington, NC 27889-5043
Dear Ms. Tankard
Subject: Contract for . . .
Xx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxx
Xxxxxxx xxxxxxx xxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxx x
xxxxxx xxx Xx xxx xxxxx
xxxxxxxx xx xxx xxxx
X xxxx xxxxxxxx xxxxxx Xxx
xxxx xxxxxxx xxxx Xxxxxx xxx
xxxxxxxxxx Xxxxx xxxxxx x
xxxxxx x
Xxxxx xxxxxxxx xxx xxx Xx
xxxxx xxxxxxx xxxx Xxx
xxxxxx x xxxxxxx Xxxxx xx
Sincerely yours
W. B. (Jeī ) Jeī erson
President
WBJ/pjm
Enclosures (3)
c: Soﬁ a Arellano
Jay Reardon
Figure 5.5 Letter Parts
Brief Correspondence | 121
Letter Styles
Letter styles vary. Business letters are usually written on letterhead
stationery in block or modifi ed block letter style. Personal letters include
return addresses instead of letterheads and may be written in block or
modifi ed block letter style.
Block letter style aligns the return address, dateline, and closing at the left
margin. Paragraphs are not indented. It is easy to key but may look
off-balance. In modifi ed block letter style, the dateline and closing begin
at the horizontal center of the page. Paragraphs begin at the left margin.
This style may be more diffi cult to key, but it looks more symmetrical on
the page. Figure 5.6 illustrates basic differences in block and modifi ed block
letter style.
Two punctuation styles are used in business letters: open and mixed. Open
punctuation means that no punctuation marks are used after the salutation
and the complimentary close. Open punctuation is considered a time-saving
style and is used with block letter style. Mixed punctuation may be used with
modifi ed block letter style, in which case the salutation and complimentary
close are followed by punctuation marks. The proper punctuation with this
style is a comma after the complimentary close and a colon (for business
letters) or a comma (for personal letters) after the salutation.
Block with No Indention, Open Punctuation
Modiﬁ ed Block with No Indention, Open Punctuation
Figure 5.6 Letter Styles
Letterhead
Dateline
Inside Address
Dear Mr. Torres
Xxxx xxxxx xxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxx xxx x xxxxx xx xxx xx xx xxx xxxxxxxx xxxxx x xxx xx xxxxx
Sincerely
Jerrod Mauer
JM/dsw
Letterhead
Dateline
Inside Address
Dear Mr. Torres
Xxxx xxxxx xxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxx xxx x xxxxx xx xxx xx xx xxx xxxxxxxx xxxxx x xxx xx xxxxx
Sincerely
Darian Webster
Enclosure: Deed of Transfer
122 | Chapter 5
COMPOSING THE MESSAGE
Because all e-mails, memos, and letters begin with a specifi c purpose, writers
must keep that purpose in mind when composing a message.
Although formatting the document is important, the headings are only a
means for conveying the ideas you want to share. The message, or the body,
is the heart of the document.
The message section of correspondence should be organized for the reader,
not for the writer. Because employees are busy and cannot waste time,
correspondence should be organized accordingly. Imagine a busy decision
maker opening an e-mail that she expects to be one page, only to discover
that the message is more than four pages long. The receiver may decide not
to spend time scrolling through and reading the four pages, especially when
she expects an e-mail to be brief. Writers who frustrate their readers or who
fail to meet their readers’ expectations are not likely to be successful in
achieving goals.
Organize ideas to suit the message. Some messages are best presented in
a straightforward manner. Others, when presented bluntly and directly,
are likely to offend readers. And still others, such as persuasive messages,
require more motivation than a direct approach provides. The strategies for
informative and good news messages, negative or bad news messages, and
persuasive messages are useful in writing text messages, e-mails, memos,
and letters.
Informative and Good News Messages
Brief correspondence usually gives the audience information that is
pleasant—or at least acceptable. Pronouncements of good news, routine
letters of inquiry, responses to letters of inquiry, and letters of appreciation
all use a similar positive organizational structure.
You can expect the readers of a good news message to be in a receptive
mood as they read your correspondence. Because your news is responsible
for their pleasant mood, these readers are easy to approach. Therefore, the
strategy is direct: Present the main idea fi rst. Explanations, background
information, and supplementary ideas follow the main idea.
The sample letter on page 104 and the e-mail from the production manager
at Gene-Tech Laboratories in Figure 5.7 are examples of the direct approach
to organizing informative and good news messages. The sample letter
conveys good news to Regina Williams, the recipient of an $800 scholarship
to a local community college. In that letter, the tone is enthusiastic, while the
tone of the following memo is more neutral or matter-of-fact.
STOP AND THINK
In what order should the names of recipients be listed in e-mails and memos?
Should a writer use Thank you as a complimentary close in a letter? Explain.
Consider this opening line:
Dear Arnie, You’re ﬁ red.
Does this message work?
Will it build goodwill? Could
the idea be presented more
eﬀ ectively? Explain.
Warm Up
Brief Correspondence | 123
Figure 5.8 shows the body of an e-mail of inquiry. Correspondence of
inquiry, while employing a more neutral tone, still represents a positive
message because it shows an interest in a concept, product, or service.
Figure 5.7 Memo Using the Good News Strategy (Direct Approach)
FiFi
M
U i
th
th G
d N
St
St t
(Di
Di
t A
h)
Figure 5.8 Positive Message: E-mail of Inquiry
l f
Explanation and supplemen-
tary ideas—why the writer
is requesting this action and
what effect it will have on
the reader
Main idea—what the writer
wants the reader to do
TO:
All Lab Employees
FROM:
Jamir Paen, Producon Manager
Jamir Patten
DATE:
November 15, 20—
SUBJECT:
Deadline to Turn In Leased Chemical Lab Garments
By December 7, 20—, please submit all leased chemical lab garments checked out to you. Return lab
coats to Room D48, placing them on hangers. Return all other leased garments to the ADH blue laundry
bins located in each department.
We signed a contract and will receive service from a new cleaning company, D & W Garment Care
Center, eﬀective December 8, 20—. Beneﬁts of the change you should noce are as follows:
Fragrance- and starch-free garments
An addional coat each week
Immediate replacement of worn or damaged garments
Inform your department head if you need to report lost or damaged garments.
124 | Chapter 5
Bad News Messages
Occasionally, the purpose of a text message, an e-mail, a memo, or a letter is
to share negative news—information readers will not be pleased to get, such
as employee layoffs or unpopular policy changes. Negative messages can
range from serious to mildly disappointing. A letter with a negative message
may refuse a request, delay an order, or register a complaint.
Readers usually are not expecting bad news, and
in this case, the direct approach is not the best
choice. If readers see the bad news immediately, the
disappointment may be so great that they miss the
explanation entirely. A bad news message must relay
the bad news and still try to maintain the reader‘s
goodwill.
Therefore, the strategy of bad news messages is
indirect. You can soften bad news by surrounding it
with pleasant ideas in the following ways:
1. Open with a positive statement, or buffer. A
buffer is something positive written to soften bad
news. Sometimes a buffer states a point upon
which the writer and reader agree. For example,
a letter declining a businessperson’s invitation to
speak to the local Chamber of Commerce might
mention the excellent work the Chamber does or
the importance of the organization in developing
relationships between the business community
and citizens.
2. In the next section of the message, clearly
announce the bad news, but place it in the
middle or at the end of the section, not at the
beginning. Writers may choose to explain the
reason for the bad news. However, sometimes
the explanation may be unnecessary or is
counterproductive.
In some bad news messages, writers choose to
imply the bad news rather than state it directly.
For example, a writer rejecting placement of her
product in a store might write, “Our contract specifi es that Dura’s Hair
Magic will be displayed on the top shelf or end cap,” rather than stating,
“I cannot allow Dura’s Hair Magic to be placed on the bottom shelf in
your store.”
3. Close the message on a pleasant note by offering an alternative solution or
a different perspective, making a constructive suggestion, or looking
positively to the future.
The memo in Figure 5.9, written by the owner of Precision Cuts Hair Studio,
shows how the bad news in the middle is buffered by pleasant ideas in the
opening and closing.
ebstock /iStockphoto.com
Brief Correspondence | 125
The opening buffer protects the reader from the bad news; a positive closing
ends on a friendly note; and the bad news is strategically sandwiched
between the two, where it is least likely to become the reader’s focus.
Figure 5.10 on the next page shows a negative news e-mail. Abraham
Bizmark of Bizmark Gold Studio writes to La’Neice Jackson, president of
D’Oro Jewelry Stores.
Letters of complaint also are examples of correspondence containing negative
news. When an individual has a legitimate complaint, the challenge is to
present the complaint without alienating the reader. Most complaint letters
also include a request to make things right, sometimes a refund, an exchange,
extra service, or at least an assurance that the problem will not recur.
Persuasive Messages
A persuasive message is any correspondence in which the sender attempts to
convince the receiver to agree with the writer. Persuasive messages are often
used to sell products or services. Persuasive messages also include requests
for assistance, support, or participation, such as a request for an employment
recommendation or an invitation to participate in a charity’s telethon.
Figure 5.9 Bad News Memo
Positive statement—
creativity, something
about which reader and
writer agree
Bad news statement—new
policy that is likely to be
unpopular
Positive close—benefits
employees may enjoy
TO:
Hair Stylists
FROM:
Mona Hairston
MH
Owner and Manager
DATE:
June 6, 20—
SUBJECT:
Fashioning a Posive and Professional Image
Being creave folks, we enjoy expressing our individuality in the way we dress. It is stylish and fun to
dress ﬂamboyantly.
Using those creave energies, some of us have been talking about ways to improve our professional
image. Toward this end, the shop will adopt a uniform dress policy beginning on the ﬁrst working day of
next month, Monday, July 2, 20—. You may choose from solid navy and solid white ouits or ouits
combining those two colors.
Besides enhancing the shop’s professional image, the new policy will save you money because your
personal clothes will not be subjected to the chemicals that you use every day. Any creave energy you
have le can be lavished on clients to make our shop the most popular one in town!
Distribuon List
Corrine Capellas
Dena Galan
Kenston Paerson
Mimi Ubuntu
126 | Chapter 5
Sometimes readers are receptive to the message—for example, the
homeowner who wants to replace her leaky, rattling windows will eagerly
listen to the salesperson who is telling her about the advantages of
replacement windows. However, some audiences are not at all receptive
to the persuasive message. Perhaps a previous experience or a lack of
interest causes the audience to be hostile. In either case, the strategy of the
persuasive message must not only gain the audience’s attention, but also
convince the audience to agree with the message. The memo in Figure 5.11,
written by a sales director, shows a persuasive strategy at work. Notice how
the opening paragraph, the “hook,” grabs the readers’ attention by using
questions and humor. The second paragraph, the “convince,” gives details
and persuades the readers by making it easy to respond to the request. The
third paragraph, the “motivate,” tries to close the deal by calling the readers
to action, telling them what to do and when to do it.
Organizing and Composing Persuasive Messages
Persuasion means that you make your idea, plan, product, or service look
appealing. Presenting false information is unethical, but it is considered
good business sense to present the strengths of an idea or a product in
a persuasive letter or a sales letter. To make your idea, plan, product, or
service seem appealing, write sales messages according to the following
organizational plan:
Hook
◾
your reader’s attention.
Convince
◾
your audience of the advantages or benefi ts.
Motivate
◾
your reader to action!
A sample complaint letter
is available at www.
cengage.com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link for
Chapter 5; then click Sample
Documents. The letter
complains of poor service at
Luigi’s Pizza Restaurant.
Figure 5.10 Bad News E-mail
Brief Correspondence | 127
HOOK Your Reader’s Attention Hooks are attention-getters. That is, they are
words designed to engage the reader. Hooks are designed to make the reader
open the message and begin to read. Hooks may even start on the envelope
of a sales letter (for example, an envelope that reads “Pay to the order of” in
front of the recipient’s name or “Free Gift Inside”). The hook may continue
after the reader opens the letter.
Sometimes an announcement written in boldface precedes the message. The
fi rst line of the body sounds exciting. Throughout the letter, the writer “pulls
out all the stops.” Some information is boldfaced, underlined, bulleted,
shadowed with color, or set apart from the text. Some persuasive messages
Figure 5.11 Persuasive Memo
Hook—uses humor and
direct questions to grab
attention
Convince—gives details to
persuade the reader
Motivate—calls the reader
to act
TO:
All Sales Representaves
FROM:
Jen Smolinski, Sales Director
DATE:
November 12, 20—
SUBJECT:
Using the Board to Help Yourself or
Pung Your Schedule to Work for You and Others
Would you like the IRS to be able to ﬁnd you in order to deliver your tax refund check? Would you like
customers to be able to ﬁnd you when they want to place an order?
If these possibilies are important to you, please help me to help you. Just today I have had ﬁve calls for
sales representaves I could not locate. That could be ﬁve orders that will not be placed, as well as
commissions that will not go into your paycheck. To avoid this problem, check in and out on the board.
It is sll on my oﬃce door, and a brand new marker is aached for your use.
Please remember to sign in when you arrive at work and to sign out when you leave for the day, but
especially mark those mes you leave the building for lunch or sales calls. If you do, I can tell your callers
when to call again or when to expect your return call. And I’ll even hold your refund check unl you
return!
cl
Distribuon List
Thiago Barcelos
Tierra Chavez
Carol Frye
Lena MacKenzie
Darya Morchenko
Keith Sommers
Randy Van Dyne
All-Star Auto Sales
128 | Chapter 5
use headings and different fonts. Some have borders, pictures, or graphics—
anything to capture the readers’ attention. Figure 5.12 illustrates some
familiar attention-getters.
The appeals of the attention-getters vary. Some appeal to the
desire to get something for nothing. Some appeal to the reader’s
sense of compassion, need for security, or desire for prestige.
Some appeal to the reader’s curiosity.
CONVINCE Your Reader This section, generally the longest
part of the correspondence, usually begins with facts because
decisions are most often based on facts—solid evidence. But the
persuading does not end with the facts.
Advertisers describe their product (sometimes including visuals)
to help readers understand, but also to provide a favorable
impression of the product. It is unethical (and illegal) for an
advertiser to lie, but the words are usually written to sell—to
create a favorable impression and a desire for the product or
service. Likewise, persuasive writers who want to sell an idea or
a concept must explain the idea clearly so that readers will see
its worthiness.
A persuasive message should offer convincing evidence of
the merits of the idea, product, or service. Facts, fi gures, and
statistics can provide objective proof. Testimonials are personal
stories or people’s statements (often famous people) that a
concept, product, or service worked for them. Sometimes
advertisers try to compel readers to try their product free for a
limited time. The advertisers hope the product will convince readers to keep
the product and pay for it. Often enclosures such as brochures with pictures,
order forms, or more testimonials are included. Sometimes a sales message is
not just a letter or memo; it is a whole packet of materials.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
You are in the midst of a worldwide
intelligent network. Communication tools are
wireless and increasingly smaller. Handheld
computers allow you to fax, call, e-mail, and
surf the Internet as well as send graphics,
videos, and instant messages anywhere in the
world. The use of devices such as Research
in Motion’s Blackberry™ handheld computer
and Palm’s™ TREO™ 800W or PRO allows
you to conduct business and communicate
with people anywhere at any time.
Think Critically
Describe some beneﬁ ts and challenges of
being constantly connected to people and
your job.
Would you
“BOGO:
Buy One, Get
One free”
like to
save some
money?
Figure 5.12 Hooks in Sales Messages
Brief Correspondence | 129
MOTIVATE Your Reader to Act Finally, the writer must try to motivate the
reader to do something—go to the phone and dial a number, say yes to a
requisition, get in his or her car and drive to the store, send an e-mail of
approval, write a check, or fi ll in a credit card number. To move the reader to
action, persuasive message writers make this part as convenient as they can.
You have probably heard motivators similar to these:
An operator is waiting to take your call.
◾
Buy now and save 15% off the cover price.
◾
Send your tax-deductible contribution and help a homeless person fi nd
◾
shelter from the cold.
Figure 5.13 on the next page is a persuasive letter from Easy Home Cooking
magazine trying to convince Phoebe Nelson to subscribe. Using testimonials,
a strong focus on Phoebe’s needs and interests, and facts, the letter is
persuasive. In addition, the use of an enclosed reply card makes it easy for
Phoebe to say yes.
Sending a personal e-mail that reveals proprietary information (ideas the
company owns) might cost you your good standing with your colleagues
or even your job. It might subject you to legal action as well. Do not say
anything in an e-mail that you would not say directly to a person and do not
write anything that might embarrass you or your organization, regardless
of who reads it. E-mail can be deleted, but it never really disappears and
may be forwarded anywhere to anyone. Most networks (the sender’s and the
receiver’s) archive and back up all e-mail.
In addition, some people might think that a simple e-mail reply to a friend
outside the company is not so bad. If so, then you might ask, “Where do we
draw the line?” and “Who draws the line?” If using the office computer to
answer personal messages is fine, then is it all right to use the company car
to pick up your dry cleaning or to use the corporate credit card to pay for that
dry cleaning? Can you use the office copy machine to photocopy brochures
for your weekend real estate business? Can you use time you have at work to
go online to order a gift for your brother’s birthday or to pay your personal
water bill? What about using the company phone to make a couple of calls to
your grandparents who live in South Africa?
Using company time and equipment to conduct personal business is unwise.
It could get your company in trouble legally, and you could be fired.
Think Critically
What is the harm in telling a friend about a new project at work that your
supervisor has assigned to you?
Focus on
Ethics
130 | Chapter 5
Figure 5.13 Sales Letter
STOP AND THINK
The Warm Up contained the following statement: “Dear Arnie: You’re fired.”
Why is the direct approach not effective for bad news messages? What is a call
to action in persuasive messages?
Brief Correspondence | 131
Chapter 5
Review
SUMMARY
1. Four types of brief correspondence—text messages, e-mails, memos,
and letters—are essential tools in the business world.
2. Writers must analyze and appropriately address the audience in all
brief correspondence by maintaining goodwill, following principles
of effective communication, using a suitable tone, and using humor
effectively
3. Considering audience needs and expectations, determining goals,
thinking about technology and the situation, and freewriting
are prewriting steps that ensure successful writing of brief
correspondence.
4. Each type of brief correspondence uses specifi c formatting that
distinguishes it from other correspondence.
5. To organize the body, writers must consider the type of message
and the reader’s needs. Writers use a direct approach in good news
messages, an indirect approach to buffer unpleasant news in bad
news messages, and a “hook, convince, motivate” strategy for
persuasive messages.
Checklist
Have I identifi ed and analyzed my audience? If I am addressing a
◾
multilevel audience, have I planned to meet the needs of each group or
type of reader?
Did I establish my purpose or goal in this correspondence?
◾
Did I use freewriting to generate the information I want to share with the
◾
audience?
Did I develop an organizational plan? Does it take into account a good
◾
news, bad news, or persuasive message?
Does my correspondence follow the correct format and use consistent
◾
style? Does it contain correct parts?
Is the tone and level of formality appropriate to the audience?
◾
Have I asked a respected peer to read my correspondence and give specifi c
◾
feedback on the impact and effectiveness of my message?
Did I proofread the headings for completeness and accuracy?
◾
Did I proofread the message for errors in spelling, keying, grammar, and
◾
punctuation?
When the correspondence was acceptable, did I sign my name or, if
◾
appropriate, write my initials to the right of my keyed name?
132 | Chapter 5
Build Your Foundation
1. Here are eight parts to a good news letter announcing that Tessa Heilig
has won a cruise to the Caribbean. However, the parts are mixed
up. Rewrite the letter, putting the sentences in proper order. Several
combinations may be possible.
a. To claim your prize, you must call 1-800-CRUISES before April 18 and
provide the operators with proof of identity.
b. You have just won an all-expenses-paid cruise to the Caribbean!
c. Congratulations, Tessa. We look forward to helping you arrange the
vacation of your life!
d. Enjoy a variety of on-board recreational activities, delectable meals,
and superb entertainment at our expense.
e. Your name, Tessa Heilig, was drawn out of 456,897 entries to be our
top-prize winner in the Colombo Publishers Sweepstakes.
f. Colombo has reserved four nights and fi ve days for you and a guest.
g. You must schedule your trip between June 1 and September 21, 20—.
h. Pack your bags, Tessa, and don’t forget the sunscreen!
2. Read the following writing situations. Select the details you need; then
write the headings for each memo.
a. You are the manager for your school’s soccer team. Normally, you
coordinate the packing of equipment and supplies for traveling to
away games. However, for the next conference game to be played at
Midland on May 9, you will be out of state attending your cousin’s
wedding. So you are writing a memo to Coach Robin Lytle and your
two assistant managers, Diego Alvarez and Carey Johansen, to remind
them of what needs to be done in your absence.
b. You are Connie Famosa, manager of A Helping Hand, a residential
cleaning service in San Alto, New Mexico. Six full-time and fi fteen part-
time employees are under your supervision. To thank the entire staff for
their service, you plan to hold a picnic in your backyard. The event will
take place on October 1, 20—, from 5 P.M. to 8 P.M. You are writing a
memo today to invite all employees and their families to the picnic.
3. Marcus Robiskie of the ABC Detective Agency has just located Akilah
Massaquoi’s car, stolen three months ago from a shopping mall. List
information you would include in a letter to Akilah from Marcus
announcing the good news. Make up the addresses. Before making your
list, use your imagination to answer these questions: How can Akilah get
her car back? When can she get her car back? How did the detective fi nd
the car? How does Akilah feel?
4. Compose and send an e-mail or a letter of inquiry to request some
information. Consider a research project for another class, a question
about a product you own, or a question about a place you want to visit.
Share the correspondence and response with the class.
Your Turn
5. Write a memo from Christa Brinkdopke, Chief of Installation Services
for Fox Cablevision, to Eric Monroe, an employee under her supervision.
Eric has just completed 25 years of service with Fox Cablevision, and
132 | Chapter 5
Brief Correspondence | 133
Christa wants to show her support for his work. Eric has had perfect
attendance for the last three years, and his customer evaluations are
consistently positive.
6. As assistant to your Quality Assurance Team at World Wide Insurance,
you are in charge of scheduling meetings. The chair, Ruben Flores, has
asked you to call a meeting for Monday afternoon, April 24, 20—. He
wants the group to discuss a recent employee concern regarding unsafe
exercise equipment in the Employee Wellness Center. Ruben would like
the Quality Assurance Team to gather in Room 124-C at 4:15. He expects
the meeting to end at 5 p.m. Write a memo announcing the meeting.
7. You are Chief Food Scientist for Lehigh Bakery in Anderson, Wisconsin.
Duane Carlson, president of the Logan Dairy Cooperative, a farmer-
owned and farmer-operated sales organization under contract to sell
its entire production to your company, has invited you to speak to his
members regarding the effect of certain veterinary medicines on the taste
of dairy products. On the date the Cooperative requested, Thursday,
January 18, 20—, you are already scheduled to attend a meeting of the
American Association of Bakers. Write a memo declining the invitation
to speak to the Cooperative.
8. Plan and draft two e-mails that announce a new fl extime program
at Bauman Industries. The program will allow workers to share the
responsibilities of one position among two or three people. Print the
e-mails to give to your instructor or to share with your classmates or team.
a. One e-mail should target and address the managerial staff of the
company. Before composing the e-mail, consider the needs, concerns,
questions, and biases of this audience.
b. The second e-mail should target and address all employees of the
company. Remember that you will need to meet the needs and answer
the questions of all readers without offending anyone.
Community Connection
9. Ask an administrator or organization in your school if you can help edit
and revise one piece of brief correspondence.
a. After receiving the document, interview the writer or writers. Make
sure you ask about the target audience and the purpose of the
correspondence.
b. Edit and revise the document. Then share it with a group of
classmates or your entire class. Collect feedback from your peers.
c. Edit and revise using the comments from your peers. Then submit the
revised draft to the administrator or organization.
d. Again collect feedback regarding the changes you made.
10. Contact a nonprofi t organization or local government agency.
a. Using a form letter or an e-mail from the agency, such as requests for
contributions or welcome messages to new members or volunteers,
analyze the target audience and the strategy used in the message.
b. Offer to write a letter, a memo, or an e-mail, such as a message
encouraging people to volunteer or to donate yard sale items.
134 | Chapter 6
134 | Chapter 6
Document Design
and Graphics
WRITE TO LEARN
Using words only, write directions from your school to your home. Then
draw a map with arrows to show the same route. Which is easier to
understand—the written directions or the map? In a short journal entry,
explain why.
Chapter
Goals
Design an effective document for the
◾
audience and purpose
Determine the audience and purpose of
◾
graphics
Format graphics to make them easy to
◾
understand
Construct graphics for the audience and
◾
purpose
Terms
bar graph, p. 149
◾
callouts, p. 159
◾
chart, p. 155
◾
decision flowchart, p. 155
◾
design elements, p. 138
◾
diagram, p. 159
◾
exploding pie graph, p. 154
◾
flowchart, p. 155
◾
formal table, p. 147
◾
Gantt chart, p. 157
◾
graphics, p. 140
◾
icon, p. 159
◾
informal table, p. 146
◾
line graph, p. 151
◾
multiple bar graph, p. 150
◾
multiple line graph, p. 151
◾
organizational chart, p. 156
◾
pictograph, p. 152
◾
pie graph, p. 153
◾
verbal tables, p. 143
◾
Focus on Document Design and Graphics
Read the sample document on the next page and answer these questions:
Describe what you see on the page. What percentage of information is
•
devoted to words? to graphics?
Has anything special been done with the words to make them stand out?
•
If so, which words and why do they stand out?
Do the graphics help present the message? Explain.
•
Where do the words explain or introduce the graphics?
•
What If?
The medium were a 24"
•
3 36" poster or trifold brochure?
A PowerPoint® presentation provided this information?
•
The insert were designed for second-graders?
•
Document Design and Graphics | 135
Sample Document with Graphics
Writing@Work
Aidan Grey is a freelance
graphic designer in Denver,
Colorado, and former
Director of Photography for
Home&Abroad (H&A), a travel
planning website. He has 13 years of graphics expertise,
including contracting with photographers, publishing images
in print and on the Web, and designing logos.
Aidan believes that a picture is worth a thousand words,
but not necessarily in English. “There’s a different kind of
eloquence in graphics because we get to use many additional
‘languages’ simultaneously—color, texture, composition,
line, light. Red is one ‘word’ and says one kind of thing, while
blue is another and says other things.” In other words, it’s important to be
sensitive to the “linguistics” and semiology (signs and symbols) of images.
The various constraints that Aidan considers when working with graphics
include content, color, licensing and copyright, cost, lighting, size, and
composition. He judges which constraints to prioritize on a project-by-project
basis, but always gives credit when using others’ work: “You’re never going to
get in trouble for crediting someone properly.”
Knowing when images hurt your content is as important as knowing when
they enhance it. “Images are not helpful when they are too busy and when they
contradict the desired message,” cautions Aidan. For example, “If your report
is about why the company is not meeting goals, images of smiling, happy
people can send a decidedly wrong message.” Images should enhance and
complement the message of the text they accompany.
Aidan’s graphic design work requires him to use communication skills along
with his graphics virtuosity. At H&A, for example, he wrote contracts, form
letters, manuals, and e-mail messages and even translated documents into
other languages for investors.
Think Critically
1. With a partner, select a photograph in this book to analyze. Individually, jot
down some notes about the “languages” the photo uses.
2. Compare notes with your partner. Does the photograph “say” more than
you thought at first? Explain.
Printed with permission of Aidan Grey
Courtesy of Aidan Grey
136 | Chapter 6
Document Design and Graphics | 137
DESIGNING THE DOCUMENT
A cluttered room with poorly designed lighting can make it diffi cult for
people to fi nd what they are looking for. A cluttered document with poorly
designed elements can put readers in the same predicament. The readers
may be discouraged if they cannot fi nd the information they need quickly
and easily.
When you write, you make many decisions—what to write, how to organize,
which words to use, and so on. Indeed, words are important to any writer,
but in technical writing, how the words look on the page is just as important
as what the words say. If they want readers to stay focused, good technical
writers must learn to design pages that are visually friendly.
For example, the 1" 3 3" plastic tab inserted into Lorenzo’s potted rosebush
included six steps for planting and 57 tiny words squeezed onto the tab.
Lorenzo could not read the tiny words, so he threw away the tab and dug a
hole deep enough to plant the root-ball of the bush several inches below the
ground. Stephanie, Lorenzo’s next-door neighbor, showed him the 2" 3 3"
set of instructions that came tied around a branch of her new rosebush. With
a couple of illustrations and print big enough for Lorenzo to see, he read
the caution against burying the root-ball too deeply and adjusted the hole
he had dug. In a few months, both neighbors had beautiful roses, thanks to
Stephanie’s better-designed instructions.
Figure 6.1 shows the two sets of instructions—one poorly designed and the
other designed with the reader’s needs in mind. The writer of instructions
for commercial potting plants must consider the reading capabilities of home
gardeners, many of whom fi nd themselves squinting when trying to read
small print.
Compare the newspaper USA
Today with a newspaper that
has a more traditional look
(for example, The Wall Street
Journal or The New York
Times). Describe the front
page of each newspaper.
How is USA Today diﬀ erent
from the other newspaper?
Which paper is more
appealing to you? Why?
Warm Up
Tea Rose
1. Find an area that
receives full sun.
2. Use rich, well-drained soil
that contains organic matter.
3. Dig a hole slightly wider
than the root-ball.
4. Plant the bush so that the top
of the root-ball is exposed.
Do not cover
the root-ball.
5. Water the area thoroughly
6. Fertilize twice a year: in
spring and in late summer.
Tea Rose
Find an area that
receives full sun. Use
rich, well-drained soil that
contains organic matter. Dig
a hole slightly wider than the
root-ball. Plant the bush so
that the top of the root-ball
is exposed. Do not cover the
root-ball. Water the area
thoroughly and fertilize twice
a year: in spring and in late
summer.
Figure 6.1 Examples of Poorly Designed and Well-Designed Instructions
138 | Chapter 6
Design Elements
In addition to words, writers can use design elements to aid
the reader’s comprehension and keep the reader’s interest.
Design elements are considerations in the writing of a document
that affect page layout. Elements to consider when designing
a document are white space, text, headings, graphics, and
medium.
White Space
White space is space that is blank. It rests the eyes, separates
chunks of information, and makes a document look inviting.
Writers can create white space in margins, between paragraphs,
before itemized lists, between columns, and around graphics.
Text
Text refers to the words printed on the page. Readers read
text more quickly if it is left-justifi ed with ragged-right edges,
meaning that the text is fl ush with the left margin of the page
and uneven along the right margin. This page is set up with left
justifi cation and ragged-right edges. Figure 6.2 shows differences
in page justifi cation.
Type fonts, the design and shape of letters, are divided into serif and
sans serif. (Sans is French for “without.”) Serif refers to letters with
distinguishing lines or “tails” (like this sentence), making it easy to see the
differences between one letter and another. Sans serif refers to letters with
few distinguishing lines and no “tails” (like this sentence). It is appropriate for
something short, such as a title or heading. The major headings in this text
use a sans serif font.
Size is measured in points, with a large point number (14 or 16) used for a
larger letter. Text in 10 or 12 points can be seen easily. For paragraphs, use
a 10- to 12-point serif font that mixes capital and lowercase letters. Do not
write an entire document in all capital letters. They are diffi cult to read and
should be used only for emphasis and for use in a title or major heading.
Figure 6.3 on the next page shows a variety of serif and sans serif fonts.
The American Institute of Graphic Arts
(AIGA) is an organization that supports
design as a “professional craft.” Its
website provides information about all
aspects of design, including careers,
educational opportunities, ethics, and
cross-cultural design.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 6
and ﬁ nd two articles that might prove
useful for someone who is interested in
designing graphics for another culture.
Also identify at least three diﬀ erent
countries, other than the United States,
discussed in any of the articles.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Left Justifi cation
Ragged Right
Left and Right Justi fi -
cation
Right Justifi cation
Ragged Left
Center
Justifi cation
Figure 6.2 Different Page Justifications
Document Design and Graphics | 139
Highlighting features are print styles such as boldface, underline, italics,
and CAPITAL LETTERS that draw attention to words and phrases. Use these
highlighting features sparingly. Overuse clutters the page and distracts the
reader, drawing attention away from the text instead of to the text.
Another tool for focusing the reader’s attention is an itemized list. To itemize
a list, set up a list separate from the text. The list may be indented from the
left margin. Bullets (• ■) or numbers often precede each item in the list. How
do you determine whether to use a numbered list or a bulleted list? Use a
numbered list when the sequence of items is important. Otherwise, use a
bulleted list.
For example, in Figure 6.4, Mr. Gorham writes his students a letter, giving
them last-minute instructions for their trip to France. He boldfaces the word
double-check and sets up a bulleted list to draw attention to the fi ve items the
students must pack.
Sans Serif Fonts
Point Size
Serif Fonts
Point Size
Arial
14 point
Book Antiqua
14 point
Calibri
12 point
Times New Roman
12 point
Century Gothic
10 point
Courier
10 point
Tahoma
8 point
Goody Old Syle
8 point
Figure 6.3 Sans Serif and Serif Fonts in Different Sizes
Complete the Practice System
of Headings worksheet
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 6;
then click Data Files.
Headings
Headings are short titles that introduce the main idea of a selected portion
of text. Like a formal outline, headings help your reader see the organization
of a document in one glance. Instead of Roman numerals, capital letters, and
Arabic numerals to show subdivisions, the size and placement of headings
show the organization. Most reports use a system of two headings (fi rst-
degree headings and second-degree headings), but they can use more. For
example, this textbook uses a system of four headings for chapters.
The following items are essenƟ al for a smooth, trouble-free trip. Check and
double-check to make sure you have packed these items:
• Your passport—you will not be allowed on the plane without it
• Your money—credit card, traveler’s checks, and some currency
• Your medical insurance card
• Any medicaƟ on you rouƟ nely take
• Your driver’s license
Figure 6.4 Use of Boldface and Bullets in a Letter
140 | Chapter 6
Graphics
Graphics are visual representations of information. They include many
familiar visual aids such as tables, line graphs, pie graphs, and diagrams.
But they also include more sophisticated and less familiar aids such as
schematics, pictographs, decision charts, and Internet graphics.
Graphics are used in technical writing whenever information can be expressed
better in a visual form than in words alone. Sometimes a graphic is used by
itself, as in the traffi c signs you see on your way to work or school. For technical
writers, a graphic is often used along with text to fully convey meaning.
Whether you use graphics alone or with text, considerations of purpose and
audience guide your decision and infl uence which graphic is appropriate for
your document. The last section of this chapter introduces you to some of
the more familiar and easy-to-design graphics.
Medium
In addition to considering white space, headings, and graphics, writers choose
the best medium to use for their document. Possible choices include paper
media (for example, heavy stock, 8 1⁄2" 3 11", or a trifold brochure) or
electronic media (for example,
e-mail, CD-ROM, or web pages).
Again, purpose and audience
determine which medium you
choose. In turn, the medium
also infl uences the design.
For example, Washington
Research Associates sent a
one-page marketing survey to
photography enthusiasts to
determine potential customers
for a photography supply
store. Readers were sent one
sheet of heavy-stock paper
with the survey on one
side and the return address
with prepaid postage on the
back. After completing the
survey, readers could simply
refold the document, use the
enclosed sticker to seal the
“envelope,” and drop it in the mail. The purpose (receiving completed
surveys quickly) infl uenced the medium (the envelope design). Likewise,
the envelope design determined placement of the survey, address, prepaid
postage, and sticker.
© c., 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
STOP AND THINK
Why do white space, ragged-right edges, serif font, and headings make text
easy to read? What is the purpose of highlighting features?
Document Design and Graphics | 141
WHO READS GRAPHICS?
A picture is indeed worth a thousand words. Graphics can clarify information
quickly. At one glance, your readers can perceive more information than they
would with words alone. Most complex technical material can be simplifi ed
with a graphic: a table, a drawing, a diagram, or a graph. Where academic
readers rely heavily on words to understand meaning, technical readers often
rely on words and graphics to convey meaning.
Audience
Technical subjects such as engineering, marketing, and medicine rely heavily
on data that is presented visually. Therefore, readers of technical documents
expect to see graphic aids in their reading. However, readers vary in their
ability to understand graphics. As with decisions about text, decisions about
graphics depend on what your readers can understand and what they already
know.
Generally, the more data in a graphic, the more diffi cult it is to read. When
deciding which graphic your audience will best understand, you should ask
yourself these questions about your reader(s):
How much does my reader know about the subject?
◾
How interested is my reader in the subject?
◾
Do my readers include a technical audience? In other words, do my
◾
readers need or expect technical information or fi gures?
Will my audience be confused by technical information or fi gures?
◾
Does my audience’s reading level tend to be higher (tenth grade or higher)
◾
or lower (ninth grade or lower)?
Purpose and Objectives
Audience is only one consideration in deciding what kind of
graphic to use. You also must consider the purpose of your
graphic as well as how much and what kind of information you
want to convey.
To choose graphics that convey your meaning most
effectively, ask yourself these two questions: What is the
purpose of the writing? How can graphics help achieve
that purpose? Then choose the graphic that best meets
your needs.
To help you decide which graphic to use, look at the Purpose
column in Table 6.1 on the following page and decide what
you want to accomplish. Maybe you want your reader to operate a digital
camera. To achieve that purpose, you want your reader to see what the
camera looks like and where each button is. Drawing the mechanism of the
camera with clearly labeled parts would help achieve that purpose. Do you
need to show numbers to your readers in an easy-to-read format? If so, a
formal table would serve your purpose.
What is being described
here?
A circle that is 3” in diameter
contains three items. At
the bottom of the ﬁ gure,
approximately 3/4” from
the bottom, is a single line
approximately 2” long that
is curved in the shape of the
bottom half of a small circle.
At the top of the 3” circle,
approximately 1/2” from the
top and 1” apart, are two
small circles 1/4” in diameter.
At the top of the 3” circle, a
perfect square encloses the
3” circle, the four sides of the
square barely touching four
points of the circle.
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
A person requiring visual representations of
technical data to aid comprehension.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Presenting complex information visually,
using page design to enhance readability and
matching graphics to audience and purpose.
142 | Chapter 6
PURPOSE
GRAPHIC
To present a small amount of
numerical data
informal table
To present numbers in easy-to-read
rows and columns
formal table
To explain an idea using words set up in
rows and columns
verbal table
To contrast data and focus on
differences
bar graph or pictograph
To contrast several sets of data and
focus on the differences
double or multiple bar graph
To follow a trend over time
line graph
To compare several trends and show
how data is related
double or multiple line graph
To show how the whole is divided
into parts or how the parts relate to
the whole
pie graph
To present a process
flowchart
To tell how to make a decision
decision flowchart
To present the structure of an
organization
organizational flowchart
To show a schedule of tasks
Gantt chart
To present an idea using a symbol
icon
To show representative details of an
object or a mechanism
diagram or line drawing
To show how something actually looks
photo
Table 6.1
STOP AND THINK
What are some questions to ask about your audience to help you select an
appropriate graphic? Using Table 6.1, identify three graphics you frequently see
in textbooks. What is the purpose of each graphic?
Document Design and Graphics | 143
DESIGNING GRAPHICS
Graphics add critical information to your text and become part of the overall
appearance of a document. Good writers create a fl ow between words and
graphics that unifi es a document, allowing readers to move along without
interruption. To help your reader interpret graphics quickly and easily, you
should keep graphics simple and neat, integrate graphics with text, give
credit for borrowed graphics, and use color effectively.
Keep Graphics Neat and Simple
The quality of a graphic is a factor in how carefully it is read. A neat, clean
graphic is easy to read and interpret. Leave enough white space so that the
graphic looks uncluttered and make the graphic large enough so that the
reader can see all parts clearly. Align decimals when they are presented in
columns, as shown in the numbers below.
8.3
0.525
98.6
27.0
In general, a graphic should have one main point. Using two uncluttered,
simple graphics to illustrate two concepts is better than using one cluttered
graphic to illustrate too many concepts.
Integrate Graphics with Text
Clearly refer to each graphic in the text before you place it on the page.
Refer to the graphic when you think your reader will look at it for the fi rst
time. Use the word Figure to refer to any graphic that is not a formal table.
Use the word Table to refer to a formal table (a table with rules and titles).
Number fi gures consecutively throughout. Number tables consecutively but
separately from fi gures throughout. Call your reader’s attention to fi gures
or tables by incorporating references into your text, using parentheses, or
creating stand-alone sentences as follows:
Table 1/Figure 1 shows the amount of rainfall in Idaho over the past
◾
three years.
The rainfall in Idaho over six years varied substantially. (See Table 1/
◾
Figure 1.)
The rainfall in Idaho over six years varied substantially (Table 1/Figure 1).
◾
The rainfall in Idaho over six years varied substantially. See Table 1/
◾
Figure 1.
Choose one method and refer to all of your fi gures and tables the same way.
Informal tables need not be referred to as a table or a fi gure. Verbal tables
use words instead of numbers, and the information is given in rows and
columns. They are not always referred to as tables or fi gures but are often
integrated into the text with an appropriate introduction.
Take a close look at the
graphics in the following
sections of this chapter. What
do you notice about each
one? What do the graphics
have in common? Notice
some of the diﬀ erences.
In which graphics do the
diﬀ erences occur?
Warm Up
144 | Chapter 6
Place each graphic in a convenient place for the reader to see.
If the graphic is small enough (1⁄5 to 1⁄2 page), try to place it
on the same page as its reference. If the graphic is large (3⁄4
to 1 page), you may need to place it on the page immediately
following your reference. In reports with complex graphics, the
graphics are sometimes placed in an appendix—especially if the
graphics interrupt the fl ow of the report.
For graphics used in reports, explain the signifi cance of the
graphic in the report as you introduce the graphic. For
example, point out parts of a diagram, trends in a line graph,
or important numbers in a table. You need not discuss every
part of the graphic, but do point out what is important for
the reader to know. Generally, explanations are presented in
the introduction preceding the graphic. More complex graphics
may require discussion before and after placement of the
graphic.
Provide a title for every graphic—except for informal tables that
are simply indented from the margin. Table titles and fi gure
titles are often centered below the fi gure. However, placement
may vary. Choose a placement and be consistent throughout the
document. Use titles that are specifi c so the readers understand
what they will learn from the graphic. For example, use
Salary Distribution for 1955–1956
not just Salaries
Regal Powerboat Model OTY-453
not just Powerboat
Give credit for a graphic if you
do not compile it yourself or if
you compile it using borrowed
data. Place the word Source
below your fi gure. Include the
bibliographical reference for the
source as you would a footnote
or an endnote.
Use Color Effectively
Color often draws a reader’s
attention before the reader pays
attention to the words. Color is a
powerful design tool that can be
used to:
Indicate a document’s
◾
organization. By using
the same color for major
headings, you give your
readers visual cues to the
overall organization of a
document and help them scan quickly for information.
Emphasize or clarify an important point.
◾
When using a color for a key
word, a phrase, an idea, or part of a graphic, you draw your reader’s
Brand X Pictures/Getty Images
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
You can get thousands of free images from a
variety of sources to add to your documents.
Many websites have images, graphics, and
photographs that are free and do not require
permission to use. You also can purchase
CDs that store thousands of images. These
CDs organize the images by categories, such
as business, wildlife, and travel. Once you
purchase the CD, you may use the images
without worrying about copyright permissions.
Think Critically
Why is it important to make sure you do not
need permission before you use an image?
Document Design and Graphics | 145
attention to important information. You also can use color to signify a
change or to guide readers through a process.
Support your text’s meaning.
◾
By using certain colors consistently to
convey specifi c information, your reader begins to associate the color with
the meaning (red with danger, for example) and therefore understands the
text more quickly.
Make your document attractive.
◾
By using colors to break up black and
white text, your page will be more appealing.
With a click of the mouse, you can change color from blue to green or green
to red, for example. But be careful. Like any technical writing tool, color can
be misused. To use color effectively:
Avoid overusing color.
◾
More than three or four colors (including black
and white as two colors) can overwhelm a reader, and using one color
(other than black) too often can be distracting.
Apply color consistently to elements throughout a document.
◾
For
example, if you set major headings in red and set key words in black
boldface, do not suddenly switch a major heading to blue or a key
word to red boldface.
Remain sensitive to cultural identifi cations with colors.
◾
International
audiences associate colors differently from American audiences. For
instance, Americans associate green with go (traffi c lights) and red with
danger (fi re trucks and stop signs). However, green is a holy color to a
Muslim and red is a sign of mourning to a South African.
Avoid unusual combinations of colors.
◾
Some colors, such as purple on a
blue background and orange on red, are diffi cult to read.
You work as a wedding planner for I Do Wedding Consulting. Your manager,
Rachel, is proud of the way you communicate with clients to find out and
provide exactly what they want for their wedding day. The company has
recently expanded to include international clients, and Rachel has put you in
charge of marketing the company’s services to Chinese couples who want a
“Westernized” wedding.
You decide to create a brochure that shows pictures of weddings you have
planned. Personally, you believe that the most beautiful weddings are “all
white.” So on the cover of the brochure, you include pictures that show
arrangements of white roses and other white flowers. Several weeks after the
brochures are distributed, Rachel calls you to her office. She is upset because
not a single Chinese couple has called to make an appointment.
Think Critically
Why was the brochure not effective for the target audience? You may need to
research color associations in other countries to learn why the brochure was not
an effective marketing tool.
Communication
Dilemma
146 | Chapter 6
CONSTRUCTING GRAPHICS
As a technical writer selecting graphics for a document, you have many
options from which to choose. You make those choices by considering which
graphics are most appropriate for different audiences and purposes. This
section shows you how one writer selected graphics for different audiences
in a series of articles promoting good health practices.
Theresa, a nutritionist and freelance writer, is working on several different
writing and promotional assignments. One is an article for Mind and Body,
a magazine for college students majoring in physical education. These
readers have a solid background in physical education, a keen interest in
the subject, a college reading level, and experience interpreting graphics.
The second article will appear in Fitness, a magazine for junior high
students. These readers have less knowledge about good health practices
and may not be as motivated to make healthy lifestyle choices. As younger
readers, their reading level is lower than that of the college students and
their experience reading graphics is limited. Theresa’s other assignments
include writing a monthly newsletter for her clients, giving a speech at
a middle school, creating a website, and organizing a health fair event.
Theresa sometimes uses her clients’ stories in her publications—with their
permission, of course.
This section will take you step-by-step through Theresa’s decision-making
process as she decides how to disseminate information to her different
audiences.
Constructing Tables
Tables are used to present words or numbers that can be organized into
categories of columns and rows. Tables, one of the most popular graphic
aids, can be informal or formal. A verbal table, often called a chart, is a
variation of the formal table, categorizing words instead of numbers into
columns and rows.
Informal Table
An informal table is a graphic that uses rows and columns drawn
without rules (lines) or stubs (column headings). In an informal table, the
information fl ows with the text. The explanation of the graphic is a brief
summary of the information presented in the graphic.
Theresa wants to motivate the younger readers of Fitness to begin a fi tness
program. Theresa thinks that beginners could benefi t from seeing how
quickly she saw results. To present her own progress after two months on
STOP AND THINK
Why should graphics be neat and simple? Identify three ways to refer to
graphics in your text. How can colors be misused in a document?
When you look at a page with
text and a graphic, which do
you read ﬁ rst—the text or the
graphic? Do you ever read
the text without looking at the
graphic? Do you ever look at
the graphic without reading
the text? Explain your answer.
Warm Up
Document Design and Graphics | 147
a workout regimen, Theresa uses an informal table. The informal table is a
good choice because the information is simple (only three items to consider)
and is appropriate for her younger audience. Figure 6.5 shows the informal
table and its written introduction.
Over the next two months, Theresa lost a total of 4.2 pounds. For every pound of fat she
lost, she gained approximately 3⁄4 pound of muscle.
Fat lost
14.0 lb
Muscle gained
9.8 lb
Total pounds lost
4.2 lb
Figure 6.5 Model of Informal Table
Formal Table
A formal table is an arrangement of information in rows and columns with
rules (lines drawn). It is typically used to organize numbers, words, or other
data in a consistent format.
Theresa wants the readers of Mind and Body to know at what rate they
should exercise to burn fat. She uses part of a table from a published
book. The older and more knowledgeable audience of Mind and Body will
understand the detailed numerical data. They also will be motivated to fi nd
their heart rate and will appreciate the information given in the footnotes.
Figure 6.6 is part of the formal table Theresa reproduced from Exercise and
You, along with her brief introduction.
Table 1 shows the recommended heart rates by age during exercise. The athlete’s
training rate is for only the most fi t athletes. The average training rate is recommended for a
healthy person beginning a fi tness program.
Table 1. Recommended Heart Rates During Aerobic Exercise
TRAINING RATESa
Age
Maximum
Heart Rate
Athlete, 85%b
Average, 80%
a Based on average heart rates of 72 beats per minute for males and 80 beats per minute for females
b Percentages represent percents of maximum heart rates in Column 2
Source: Alan Grayson and Suzanne Brazinski, Exercise and You, Clearview, ND: Mountain Press, 1994, 72.
Figure 6.6 Model of Formal Table and Introduction
Formal table is
labeled Table
Superscript letters
refer to footnotes
Vertical rules
Footnotes explain
parts of the table
Source provides
bibliographic data
Stubs
148 | Chapter 6
A formal table is appropriate here because the many numbers make the
information more diffi cult to read. By presenting numbers in columns, the
formal table helps to classify the information.
Theresa decides to use only a few rules because more would clutter the
graphic. The columns are named with stubs. Notice the “a” and “b” super-
scripts next to the column titles. They direct the reader’s attention to the
footnotes that give additional information about the table. Underneath the
graphic, the word Source appears with a footnoted bibliographic entry. Notice
that the introduction tells what kind of information is included in the table,
but it does not explain every item. The table, with a short introduction, is
self-explanatory.
Verbal Table
As already stated, a verbal table, also known as a chart, is similar to a formal
table with its rows and columns. Like a formal table, it uses stubs and
may include footnotes and bibliographic information if taken from another
source. It is different, though, in the kinds of data included. Formal tables
use numerals; verbal tables use words. Some writers refer to a verbal table
as simply a table and number it. Other writers are less formal, referring to a
chart, for example, without numbering it.
Theresa wants to emphasize to her younger audience the dangers of poor
eating habits. She could write this information in a paragraph, but she
decides that a chart presents the information more effi ciently. So Theresa
constructs this chart, the simple verbal table shown in Figure 6.7, and writes
a short introduction. Note that she stays away from longer medical terms
such as hypertension, atherosclerosis, and gastroenterological disease.
The following chart shows that some diseases have possible causes in poor
eating habits.
DISEASE
DIET
Heart disease, stroke
High in saturated fat
High blood pressure
High in salt
Cancer
Low in fiber, fruits, and vegetables
Diabetes
High in sugar, low in fiber
Source: Raul Amaral, Nutrition, New York: Medical Press, 1992, 12.
Figure 6.7 Model of a Verbal Table with Introduction
Constructing Graphs
A graph is a visual aid that shows the relationships among numerical data.
Five types of graphs are bar graphs, pictographs, Gantt charts, line graphs,
and pie graphs.
To apply the concepts in this
section, complete the Formal
Table Activity worksheet
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 6;
then click Data Files.
Document Design and Graphics | 149
Bar Graph
The bar graph is a graph that uses a horizontal axis and a vertical axis to
compare numerical data presented in rectangular bars.
Theresa wants to show the readers of Fitness how much fat she lost each
week for the fi rst two months. She has already given these readers the
total amount of fat she lost and wants to follow that information with
more specifi c data. Because the bar graph is relatively easy to read, it is
appropriate for the Fitness readers. Figure 6.8 shows the bar graph Theresa
designed, along with the introduction that tells her readers which numbers
to pay attention to.
Weeks
Figure 1. Fat Loss Per Week
Pounds
Tick Mark
Dependent
Variable
Vertical
Axis
Horizontal
Axis
Independent
Variable
Labeled a
Figure because it
is not a Table
3.6
2.7
1.5
1.1
1.5
1.2
1.1
1.3
Figure 1 shows the progression of fat loss per week for eight weeks. Notice that the greatest
amount of fat loss occurred during weeks 1 (3.6 pounds lost) and 2 (2.7 pounds lost). Weeks 3
(1.5 pounds lost) and 4 (1.1 pounds lost) show the least amount of fat loss.
Figure 6.8 Model of Bar Graph with Introduction
In her bar graph, Theresa uses the vertical axis for the dependent variable
(the number of pounds lost) and the horizontal axis for the independent
variable (the number of weeks). The dependent variable changes depending
on, or relative to, the independent variable. Here the pounds lost depends
on the number of weeks Theresa stays with her fi tness routine. Typically,
a vertical axis represents the dependent variable and a horizontal axis
represents the independent variable. Often the horizontal axis depicts time
or distance.
Theresa is careful to label both axes for the reader. She also added the
specifi c number of pounds atop each bar for easy reference. To do so is not
necessary, but is helpful. In fact, Theresa could have omitted the numbers
next to the tick marks because the actual numbers were placed atop the bars.
Typically, the body will lose more weight at fi rst because of sustained metabolism and signifi cant
water loss. Several weeks into the weight-loss program, a person’s metabolism slows down
the amount of loss to protect the body from harm. Notice also that after seven weeks on the
program, Theresa’s weight loss stabilized at a little more than a pound a week.
150 | Chapter 6
The decision to add specifi c numbers depends on who your readers are and
how much detail they need. Additional tick marks between pounds to mark
individual ounces or half pounds were not added because the graph was
understandable without them and Theresa wanted to avoid cluttering the
graph. Notice that the bars are the same width and that the space between
the bars is one-half the bar width.
Also notice how Theresa introduces the graphic before she places it in
her article and continues her explanation after the graphic. Dividing the
discussion this way breaks up her lengthy explanation.
Multiple Bar Graph
To compare how much fat she lost to how much muscle she gained, Theresa
uses the multiple bar graph, a bar graph with more than one bar for each
measurement, shown in Figure 6.9. With just two bars, this double bar
graph is easy for both audiences to read. However, Theresa decides to use
the multiple bar graph just for the Fitness readers because she wants to
emphasize the difference in fat loss and muscle gain in the fi rst weeks.
Weeks
Figure 2. Fat Compared to Muscle Gain, in Pounds (for 8 weeks)
Optional
Numbers Atop
Bars
Key
3.6
2.7
.9
.8
Fat Lost
Muscle Gained
1.5
1.1 1.0
1.0
1.5
1.5 1.7
1.3
1.2 1.4
1.4
1.1
Figure 2 compares the amount of fat lost to the number of pounds gained. Notice that the
amount of muscle gained is small compared to the amount of fat lost during the fi rst weeks.
However, as the fat loss stabilized during weeks 7 and 8, the amount of muscle gain is slightly
higher. Muscle is denser than fat. As the body converts more fat to muscle, the net effect is to
gain weight while still losing fat.
Figure 6.9 Model of a Double Bar Graph with Introduction
The double bar graph uses two sets of bars on a horizontal and vertical axis
to compare several sets of numerical data. With some bars taller than others,
the bar graph depicts differences dramatically. Again, the introduction points
out what is most important to the reader.
The bars for fat lost are shaded differently from the bars for muscle gained.
A key is provided to explain the shading. Also, Theresa adds the specifi c
pounds atop each bar as she did in the single bar graph. This way her
readers can see the specifi c amount easily. However, she could have omitted
the numbers to give just a close approximation of the data.
Document Design and Graphics | 151
Line Graph
The line graph is similar to a bar graph in that it uses a horizontal axis and a
vertical axis to compare numerical data. Instead of bars, however, this graph
uses a line that depicts a trend.
Theresa can use a line graph to show the same data she used in the bar
graph. A line graph uses a horizontal axis and a vertical axis to show a trend
or relationship among numbers. Theresa must decide which graph is more
appropriate for her readers. To experiment with a different graph, she plotted
the same eight-week fat-loss data on a line graph. Figure 6.10 shows the
same data in a line graph that Figure 6.8 shows in a bar graph.
Weeks
Figure 3. Fat Loss (8 weeks)
Pounds
Figure 3 shows how the fat loss peaked in the earlier weeks, dropped remarkably
during the middle weeks, and plateaued during the last four weeks.
Figure 6.10 Model of Line Graph with Introduction
Theresa’s line graph illustrates the fat loss over a period of time. Even
though it shows the same data shown in Figure 6.8, it plays up the general
trend, not the individual numbers. Therefore, the introduction focuses on the
trend—the fat loss “dropped remarkably” and “plateaued”—playing up the
relationships in the data instead of the differences.
This graph would be appropriate for either audience because the trend
is easily interpreted, but Theresa decides not to use this line graph for
either article. She believes that the bar graph is more appropriate for the
inexperienced readers of Fitness because she wants to highlight differences
in the fat lost. Instead, for her Fitness audience, Theresa considers using the
multiple line graph shown in Figure 6.11 on the following page.
Multiple Line Graph
Theresa’s Figure 6.11 puts the same information from the double bar graph
in Figure 6.9 into a multiple line graph. A multiple line graph uses more
than one line to compare data. You do not want to use too many lines,
though. Otherwise, the graph may look cluttered and be diffi cult to read.
Multiple lines are usually presented in different colors or line schemes—
dotted, hyphenated, or straight. Theresa’s double line graph compares two
sets of data.
152 | Chapter 6
Theresa decides that the physical education majors would be interested in
seeing how the two sets of data interact with each other and would have
the educational background to understand how muscle gain affects fat
loss. While she will provide her Fitness readers with the same information
in two bar graphs, she will provide the information to her Mind and Body
readers in one multiple line graph. Theresa always chooses her graphics
by considering the needs of her audience as well as her own purpose for
writing.
Notice how the double line graph illustrates the relationship between
fat loss and muscle gain rather than the differences between fat loss and
muscle gain. Again, the introduction emphasizes this relationship and
provides Theresa the opportunity to make the relationship clear to her
readers. Remember that writers use introductions to graphics to direct their
readers' attention to certain parts of the fi gure.
Pictograph
A pictograph is a special kind of bar graph that uses pictures instead of bars
to represent data. Like bar graphs, pictographs show differences in related
data. In addition, pictographs add color and interest, are easy to read, and
are especially appropriate for nonnative speakers of English. To be clear, the
pictures or icons must be easily recognized and distinguishable from one
another.
Employees of Grow Organic Consortium competed with other businesses in
their area to see which company’s employees could come closest to eating
eight servings of fruits and vegetables every day for a month. Several weeks
into the competition, Theresa presents the results in the pictograph shown in
Figure 6.12. She decides to use the pictograph in her monthly newsletter to
spur other companies to step up the pace.
Weeks
Fat
Lost
Key
Muscle
Gained
Figure 4. Fat Loss (8 weeks)
Pounds
Figure 4 illustrates that the relationship between fat loss and muscle gain is more evenly
matched after the fi rst weeks of the physical fi tness program. During the fi rst two
weeks, the amount of muscle gain is minimal and fat loss is at its maximum. As the fat
loss plateaus, the muscle gain stabilizes, surpassing fat loss by a few ounces.
Figure 6.11 Model of Double Line Graph with Introduction
Document Design and Graphics | 153
Like the bar and line graphs, the pictograph uses horizontal and vertical axes
to present data. The colorful fruits and vegetables will appeal to Theresa’s
general audience. The approximate numbers are rounded to the nearest
quarter serving. However, if precision is important, a pictograph would not
be the best choice. In the fi gure above, Theresa turns the graph to present
the data horizontally so that her audience can read the data like a calendar.
Pie Graph
To represent what percentage of total daily food intake should consist
of fat, protein, and carbohydrates, Theresa draws a pie graph, shown in
Figure 6.13 on the following page. A pie graph is a circular graphic that
shows how parts relate to the whole.
The whole totals 100 percent, with each piece of the pie representing a
percentage of the whole. Notice that the pieces of the pie move clockwise
from the twelve o’clock position from largest to smallest. A pie graph should
contain no more than seven sections.
The introduction repeats the actual percentages in the pie and points out
the signifi cance of those numbers. The readers of Mind and Body already
know these percentages and do not need to be reminded of them. So Theresa
decides not to use the pie graph for this more knowledgeable audience but
does include it for her Fitness readers.
Figure 6.12 Average Consumption of Fruits and Vegetables for Four Weeks at Grow Organic
Consortium—Model of Pictograph with Introduction
Figure 5 shows the average number of servings of fruits and vegetables that the employees of
Grow Organic Consortium ate for a month. The teamwork and friendly competition motivated
them to meet the goal of eight servings during most weeks.
Complete the Pie Graph
Activity worksheet available
at www.cengage.com/
school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 6;
then click Data Files.
Week 1
Servings
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
= 1 serving
Figure 5. Average Number of Servings Consumed in One Month
154 | Chapter 6
Figure 6 shows the amount of protein, carbohydrates, and fat a person on a fi tness plan needs in
one day. Surprisingly, the human body needs more carbohydrates (65%) than protein and much
less fat than previously thought.
Protein
15%
Fats
20%
Carbohydrates
65%
Figure 6. Daily Recommendations of Protein, Carbohydrates, and Fat
Figure 6.13 Model of Pie Graph with Introduction
Figure 7 shows the percentages of carbohydrates from different sources consumed in one week by
Samir, a teen at risk for type 2 diabetes. Half the carbohydrates consumed come from unhealthy
simple sugars. Note that more than 1/5 of his weekly intake comes from soft drinks alone.
Figure 6.14 Model of Exploding Pie Graph with Introduction
Theresa creates an exploding pie graph for the readers of Fitness and Mind
and Body. An exploding pie graph separates, or “explodes,” one wedge from
the circle, thus drawing attention to this piece of the pie. Theresa thinks that
the younger readers need a reality check about consumption of soft drinks
and that the Mind and Body readers should be alert to consumers’ growing
dependency on soft drinks.
White Bread
27%
Cookies/Chips
22%
Soft Drinks
21%
Fruits/
Vegetables
18%
Whole
Grains
12%
Figure 7. Types of Carbohydrates Consumed
Document Design and Graphics | 155
Theresa explodes the soft drinks wedge by separating it from the rest of the
pie and shading it orange to signal a dangerous overconsumption. Even with
a few extra pieces and a separated part, any audience will be able to under-
stand the pie relatively easily.
Constructing Charts, Diagrams, and Pictures
A chart is a drawing with boxes, words, and lines to show a process or an
organizational structure. Three popular charts include the fl owchart, decision
fl owchart, and organizational chart. A diagram or drawing shows how
something looks or how it operates.
Flowchart
Theresa wants a quick way to show the complex process of converting
glucose to fat. She knows that the readers of Mind and Body already
understand what happens to food the body does not use, but the readers
of Fitness are unaware of this process. She chooses a fl owchart, shown in
Figure 6.15, to illustrate this process to her less knowledgeable readers. In a
fl owchart, the lines and arrows show a process or series of steps. Theresa’s
introduction summarizes the process.
Sugars
Starches
Glucose
Fat
Energy
Figure 8. Result When Sugars and Starches Are Digested
Figure 6.15 Model of Flowchart with Introduction
Figure 8 shows what happens when sugars and starches are digested to glucose. The glucose
that is not used by the brain or muscles is converted to fat.
Decision Flowchart
Theresa wants to help her Mind and Body readers stay within their target
heart rate while exercising. So she creates the decision fl owchart shown
in Figure 6.16 on the next page to illustrate how to adjust heart rates. A
decision fl owchart is a special fl owchart that uses symbols to indicate critical
parts of making a decision. Flowcharts should cover only the major steps.
You want to save the details of the process to include in your explanation
in the text. Also, you should be careful not to confuse your reader with too
many symbols and to provide a key for the symbols if necessary.
156 | Chapter 6
Theresa uses standard symbols to indicate parts of the decision-making
process: Ovals indicate where the process starts and ends, rectangles or
squares indicate activities, diamonds indicate places to make decisions,
and arrows direct the fl ow of the process. Colors applied consistently signal
critical parts of the process, but readers could understand the chart without
color. The fl ow of information moves up and down and from left to right.
Organizational Chart
Theresa was asked to speak to a student body during an assembly. To
make students aware of the school’s Wellness Center, she creates an
organizational chart. An organizational chart is a drawing with boxes,
Use the process in Figure 9 to adjust your heart rate during exercise.
Exercise
moderately for
10 minutes
Stop
exercise session
Take pulse rate
Take pulse rate
Exercise for 5 minutes
Adjust level of intensity:
More intense if rate is too low
Less intense if rate is too high
Exercise at this level for
remainder of workout
Does pulse rate
fall within the
target range?
Does pulse rate
fall within the
target range?
Yes
Yes
No
No
Figure 6.16 Model of Decision Flowchart with Introduction
Figure 9. Process for Adjusting Your Training Rate
Document Design and Graphics | 157
words, and lines to show how an organization is structured. Theresa’s chart,
in Figure 6.17, shows the hierarchy of the Wellness Center’s employees.
Complete the Organizational
Chart Activity worksheet
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link
for Chapter 6; then click
Data Files.
The blocks contain the job titles. The highest position is at the top of the
chart. The lines show who reports to whom. The introduction describes
information in the chart.
Gantt Chart
A Gantt chart is a bar graph used to schedule the major tasks of a complex
project. Named for Henry Gantt, who developed it, the chart uses bars to
depict the length of time needed to complete each task.
Theresa has been asked to chair a
committee to organize a health fair
for the retirees of her community. The
team will meet in July to plan the fair,
which will take place on September
23 and 24. At the second meeting,
Theresa passes out the Gantt chart
shown in Figure 6.18 on the following
page. Theresa’s chart provides the
schedule for completing the tasks.
To make sure the committee will have
everything accomplished by September
23, Theresa completed the schedule
by working backwards—from the
date of the fair back through time
to the July planning meetings. Her
chronological list shows that some
later tasks are dependent on the
completion of earlier tasks.
Manager
Aerobics
Trainer
Weight
Trainer
Assistant
Assistant
Assistant
Assistant
Nutrition
Expert
The following chart shows the organization of the school’s Wellness Center.
Figure 6.17 Model of Organizational Chart with Introduction
© Helder Almeida, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
158 | Chapter 6
A Gantt chart can include subtasks that fall under the major tasks, extra lines
to indicate milestones reached, color coding to indicate areas of responsibility,
and specifi c dates to indicate completion of tasks. The chart also helps group
members assign the tasks necessary to complete the project on time.
Theresa keeps her chart simple. She presents it as a tentative schedule,
realizing that the timeline may change. Also, because the schedule is not
part of a written report but is simply distributed to the committee members
for consideration, it has no fi gure title or number.
Planning Schedule for Health Fair September 23 and 24
Task
July
August
September
Plan Events
Arrange Venue
Contact Vendors
Arrange Security
Sign Vendor Agreements
Advertise Event
Set Up Booths/Tents
Hold Health Fair
Figure 6.18 Health Fair Planning Schedule—Model of Gantt Chart
Writers have a responsibility to present data accurately without creating
distortions that may be misleading. When constructing graphs drawn on
horizontal and vertical axes, make sure you begin the quantitative scale at
zero and keep horizontal and vertical axes proportional. Study these two
graphs of approval ratings for a political candidate.
Thinking Critically
Which graph minimizes the trend? Which graph exaggerates the trend? How
would you draw the graph to present the data in a fair and balanced way?
Focus on
Ethics
Approval Rating
1 eru
giF
eru
giF
Approval Rating
Document Design and Graphics | 159
Diagram
For her Mind and Body article, Theresa uses a diagram—a line drawing—
shown in Figure 6.19, from Good Health to show how triglycerides (fat) look
in the bloodstream. She believes that her Mind and Body readers have the
background for this information and hopes the diagram will reinforce the
dangers of a diet that is high in fat.
Notice the use of callouts, names of specifi c parts of a diagram that are
connected to the diagram or drawing with lines. The drawing represents
a simplifi ed version of the blood arteriole and capillaries. Adding other
particles in the bloodstream would complicate the graphic. Here Theresa
drew only what was needed to make her point.
Icon
An icon is a simple picture or drawing that represents an idea or a concept.
Often the rendering uses clip art, drawings available for free or at a nominal
cost. In all cases, the icon is an easily recognizable symbol of an idea. Such
symbols can be used as signs. For example, most people are familiar with
the no-smoking sign—a red circle around a picture of a cigarette with a red
diagonal line drawn through the cigarette. The symbols also can signal a
recurring idea in a newsletter, in a brochure, or on a website.
In her newsletter, Theresa uses the icons shown in the margin. These icons
will alert readers to the exercise tips and recipes. Using the icons, readers
can turn to them immediately without reading the text to fi nd the tips and
recipes. Once readers get used to seeing the icons, they will know what to
expect when they come across them in the newsletter. Because the icons
are simple symbols used to direct readers to text, they do not require fi gure
numbers, captions, or titles.
FLOUR
Clumping of
blood cells
Sludging
Arteriole
Capillary
(no blood flow)
Figure 10. Effect of High Triglycerides on Blood Cells
Figure 6.19 Model of a Diagram with Introduction
Figure 10 shows how the blood cells clump together abnormally after a dinner high in triglycer-
ides (fat). Notice that when the triglycerides create sludging, blood fl ow to the capillaries
is impeded.
160 | Chapter 6
Photograph
A photograph can be inserted into a document when it is important to
show what something looks like. Photographs include a great deal of detail,
however, and are not always an appropriate graphic aid. To be effective, the
photo should be clear and should focus on a particular idea or message.
Theresa decides to set up a web page to promote a healthy lifestyle.
Because she believes exercising with others encourages people to continue
their exercise plan, she decides to post a photograph of coworkers taking
a walk after work. Her photo also helps create the mood she is after, that
is, depicting fi tness in a fun and positive way. Figure 6.20 shows the photo
she chose.
STOP AND THINK
Which chart shows a process? an organizational hierarchy? the way something
looks? What are the advantages and disadvantages of using a photograph?
Figure 6.20 Photograph of Employee Walk with Introduction
Some workers at Sampsun Marine Industries, shown in Figure 6.2, get together every day for a
walk through the park.
© Tyler Olson, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
Document Design and Graphics | 161
Chapter 6
Review
SUMMARY
1. To create effective document design, (a) use adequate white space,
(b) use left justifi cation with ragged-right edges, (c) use a 10- to 12-point
serif font that mixes capital and lowercase letters, (d) determine a
workable system of headings, (e) use highlighting techniques to draw
attention to important information, and (f) consider appropriate media.
2. Graphics should be neat and placed in a convenient location for the
reader (usually after they are fi rst mentioned in the text). Graphics
require an introduction, appropriate fi gure and table captions and
numbers, a citation for the source when necessary, aligned decimals,
and effective use of color. Graphics presented by themselves (as in a
poster or a sign) do not require labels and numbers.
3. Each type of graphic has a purpose that can be matched to writing
objectives and audience needs.
4. Effective graphics include informal, formal, and verbal tables;
bar graphs, line graphs, pictographs, and pie graphs; fl owcharts,
organizational charts, and Gantt charts; diagrams; icons; and
photographs.
Checklist
Have I determined my writing objectives and found a graphic to match?
◾
Have I designed my page with adequate white space, left justifi cation
◾
and ragged-right edges, a 10- to 12-point serif font, capital and lowercase
letters, a workable system of headings, and appropriate highlighting
features?
Have I selected appropriate graphics?
◾
Have I selected an appropriate medium for my writing objectives?
◾
Have I constructed the graphic neatly?
◾
Have I referred to the graphic properly as a table or fi gure?
◾
Have I placed the graphic in a convenient place for the reader?
◾
Have I provided a specifi c title for each graph, chart, and formal table?
◾
Have I numbered the graphics consecutively?
◾
Have I given credit for the graphic found in an outside source?
◾
Have I explained the signifi cance of the graphic?
◾
Have I kept the graphic as simple as possible?
◾
Have I used color effectively?
◾
Have I constructed each graphic according to the required criteria?
◾
162 | Chapter 6
Build Your Foundation
1. Examine several of your textbooks for design features. Describe each
design. Which book has the best design? Why?
2. Create a scrapbook of graphics from newspapers, magazines, and the
Web. Using your checklist, decide whether the graphics present the data
effectively. Note the difference in the graphics that is not specifi cally
covered in this chapter. Into which category of graphics do they fall?
3. Suggest the best graphic to use for presenting the situations below. In
addition, try to construct the graphic.
a. Lamar wrote to his father and listed his latest test scores in calculus:
Chapter 1, 83; Chapter 2, 79; Chapter 3, 92.
b. Using a pedometer, Thanh compared the miles she walked during a
school week to the miles she walked during her vacation. School: May
25, 1.3; May 26, 1.9; May 27, 2.7; May 28, 1.6; May 29, 2.5. Vacation:
June 1, 0.6; June 2, 1.2; June 3, 0.9; June 4, 1.4; June 5, 2.0.
c. Gahiji wrote his parents to tell them how he spent the $1,250 they
gave him for his fi rst month of college: $850, books and educational
supplies; $65, snacks and pizza; $210, dorm accessories (rug, poster,
bedding); $46, entertainment; $40, parking fi ne; $39, unspent funds.
d. Crystal, head cashier for a grocery store, must show her coworkers
the procedure for gaining approval for a customer check over $300:
Inform the customer about store policy, verify the identity of the
customer with a photo ID, ensure that the information on the check is
correct, get two phone numbers from the customer, write your initials
on the check, and call the manager to approve the check.
e. Alessandra must show her physics instructor the structure of a
hydrogen atom and the location of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
f. Patrick is designing a travel brochure for future Peace Corps
volunteers. He wants to show how eager students were to learn
English in a Philippine village last summer.
g. Sasha is giving a PowerPoint® presentation on the growth of fi sh farms
in her state. Five years ago there were 120 farms; four years ago, 200
farms; three years ago, 250 farms; two years ago, 350 farms; and now,
560 farms. She needs an attractive opening slide.
h. In July, Zach is collaborating with three other researchers to write
an article for an academic journal. To be published in the December
issue, the article must be accepted by October 10. To meet this
deadline, Zach plans these tasks: review of literature conducted, draft
written, draft sent to editor, draft sent to reviewers, draft revised,
article resubmitted, and article published.
Your Turn
4. Write a brief article explaining the signifi cance of a special photo.
Incorporate the photo correctly into your article.
5. Convert the following survey information into a pie graph: Out of
450 clients of Iron Works Gym, 175 want more weight-lifting equipment,
50 want child care services, 75 want a sauna, 50 want more personal
trainers, and 100 want a juice bar.
Document Design and Graphics | 163
6. Use the information from the table below to generate graphics. For each
graph, write a brief introduction. Title and number each graphic properly.
Table 1. Beverage Consumption, 1970–2005
Beverage
Whole Milk
Other Milk
Tea
Coffee
Bottled Water
NA
NA
Diet Soft Drinks
NA
NA
NA
Regular Soft Drinks
NA
NA
NA
All numbers rounded to the nearest gallon per capita.
Source: Adapted from USDA/Economics Research Service. “Food Availability: Spread-
sheets.” February 27, 2009.
A pie graph of the bottled water, diet soft drinks, and regular soft
◾
drinks consumed in 2005. Total the gallons of water and soft drinks
and compute the percentages
A table citing the use of caffeinated beverages—including tea, coffee,
◾
diet carbonated, and regular carbonated—since 1980
An informal table with the whole milk, other milk, and total milk
◾
consumed in 1970
A bar graph showing the total number of carbonated beverages
◾
consumed from 1980 to 2005
A double bar graph showing the consumption of tea and coffee since
◾
A pictograph showing water consumption from 1990 to 2005
◾
A line graph showing the amount of bottled water consumed since 1980
◾
A double line graph showing the consumption for whole milk and
◾
other milk since 1970. Do you notice a trend? Explain.
A multiple line graph showing the consumption of bottled water, diet
◾
carbonated drinks, and regular carbonated drinks consumed from
1985 to 2005. Do you see a relationship among this data? Explain.
Community Connection
7. Create a poster, fl yer, or brochure to advertise an area event, to educate
people on a topic, or to alert them to some danger in your area. The
document should follow principles of document design and use graphics
to convey meaning and to support your message. Suggestions include an
upcoming rabies clinic, free pound puppies, evacuation routes, allergen
warnings, boating safety, a musical event, or a charity event. Ask
permission to post your document in appropriate places.
164 | Chapter 7
Writing for the Web
WRITE TO LEARN
Think about all of the ways you use the Internet. Then try to imagine your
life without the Internet. What would it be like? Write a short journal entry
describing how your life would be different if there were no Internet.
Chapter
Goals
Plan web pages
◾
Organize and design web pages
◾
Write text for web pages
◾
Write text for special kinds of web pages
◾
Terms
animation, p. 172
◾
blog, p. 179
◾
demographics, p. 169
◾
discussion forum, p. 182
◾
FAQ, p. 180
◾
home page, p. 168
◾
hyperlink, p. 170
◾
interactive, p. 167
◾
Internet, p. 167
◾
keywords, p. 177
◾
RSS, p. 180
◾
scannable, p. 176
◾
usability, p. 172
◾
Web Accessibility Initiative
◾
(WAI), p. 173
wiki, p. 181
◾
World Wide Web,
◾
p. 167
Focus on Writing for the Web
Read the sample document on the next page and answer these questions:
What is the reason for the site?
•
Describe the color scheme. How does it make you feel?
•
Does the page look balanced? Why or why not?
•
What information is on the page? Is it easy to fi nd? Explain.
•
If you were a newcomer to the site, which part would you visit? If you had
•
visited the site before, which part might you revisit?
What combination of text and graphics do you see?
•
What If?
The site provided FAFSA forms for different majors or different schools?
•
The site provided a survey to determine eligibility for fi nancial aid?
•
An upcoming deadline was given for submission of FAFSA forms?
•
The site highlighted college graduates who had used fi nancial aid?
•
The site hosted its own discussion forum?
•
Writing for the Web | 165
Sample Web Page
166 | Chapter 7
Writing@Work
Michael Luongo is an experienced
and prolific freelance travel writer
based in New York City. For ten
years, he has been publishing his
work in magazines, in newspapers,
in books, and on the Web. He works with all kinds of
publishers, from prestigious ones such as The New York Times
to specialized and small ethnic publishers.
A versatile writer like Michael knows how important it is to
adjust one’s writing style and format for publication on the
Web. His rule of thumb is that if you have to print something
out to read it, it’s too long to be readable on a screen. In
addition, paragraphs in web articles must be shorter than
they usually are in print.
“Think of ways to divide your work into pithy bits that are full of information
and catchy,” suggests Michael, “such as top tens and other ‘listy’ ways of
writing.” Michael also believes that avoiding the wordiness and punctuation of
complete sentences increases readability and highlights the important content.
Web copy also must be interactive and clickable—full of words and images
that contain links to other related material. According to Michael, “You want to
make your work so clickable that a reader will lose all sense of time with it.”
Michael’s advice to those who want to publish on the Web is to start publishing
on the Web. “Create your own website or blog first—since you can control
it—and use your name or your specialty as a part of the website or blog name.
You should always reserve yourname.com as soon as you can.” For example,
Michael’s website is www.michaelluongo.com. “It’s your calling card; your
portfolio; and, in my case, part of my dream work as a travel writer.”
Think Critically
1. Do you agree with Michael about the length of writing on web pages?
Explain.
2. Starting with Michael’s advice in this feature, create a “top ten” list of rules
and tips for writing on the Web.
Printed with permission of Michael Luongo
© Ingrid Breyer
Writing for the Web | 167
GETTING STARTED ON WEB PAGES
WebMD, HowStuffWorks, eBay, Facebook, and Flickr are now household
terms. The expression to google, which might have been mistaken for kiddy
babble ten years ago, shows how quickly the search engine Google has
infi ltrated not only our homes, but also our lexicon. Over 1.6 billion people
worldwide, or nearly 24 percent of the world’s population, use the Internet
(Miniwatts). Knowing how to write for these users will give you a critical
advantage in the workplace.
Although the terms the Web (for World Wide Web, a collection of online
resources) and the Internet are often used interchangeably, they are not
synonymous. The Internet, a global system of networks, is the infrastructure
on which the World Wide Web as well as other protocols, including
e-mail and instant messaging, travel. Think of the Internet as the train track
and the Web as one of the trains running on the track.
Reading Web Pages
Because of the interactive
nature of the Internet, with
pages that respond to user
input, users read online material
differently from the way they
read printed text. Where people
read books and magazines in
a linear fashion from one page
to the next, web readers scan
pages from the top center,
then down from left to right,
looking for keywords. Instead
of turning pages, readers follow
links, jumping from one page
to another and one site to
another, wherever their interests
take them. In this way, readers
control the fl ow of information,
and no two readers read a
website the same way.
On the FAFSA home page
illustrated on page 165, users
needing to apply for a PIN click
“Students & Parents Apply for a PIN.” If users already have a PIN, they move
to the part of the site that meets their needs at the moment—perhaps “Make
Corrections to a Processed FAFSA.” The interaction is more like a conversation
as the web page communicates with different users in different ways.
Online readers want speed and convenience. Most people fi nd that just
ten seconds is too long to wait for a page to load. If the site glitters with
animation but does not give viewers the information they seek, they are not
likely to return. Furthermore, readers prefer not to scroll horizontally (to the
right) or vertically (down) to fi nd information.
How do you read a novel?
How do you read a website?
Do you read both in the
same way, or do you read
them diﬀ erently? Explain.
Warm Up
Brand X Pictures/Getty Images
168 | Chapter 7
Because of their desire to navigate quickly, readers pick up clues from one
page to help them understand the next page. As a web writer, you must be
familiar with these clues and adjust your writing to this different way of
reading and accessing data.
Planning Web Pages
To write text for the Web, you need to think through the basics of planning
a document: What is your purpose? Who is your audience? Your challenge is
to achieve your purpose and meet the needs of your audience.
What Is Your Purpose?
In Chapter 2, you learned to determine the purpose of your writing early
in the process and to use your purpose to guide you as you made decisions
about your document. Here, too, determining your purpose is important.
What do you want to happen as a result of this document? In other words,
why does your website or web page exist? What is the reason for your post
or discussion?
The purpose of most technical writing is to inform or persuade. In web
writing, the purpose might expand to include other goals, such as offering
a service, defi ning an image, soliciting opinions, creating a community, or
entertaining people. One site informs customers about cell phone plans,
provides a service by recording minutes used, and persuades customers
to purchase a smartphone. Your bank’s website projects an image of a
responsible, conservative institution. MySpace brings people together, and
YouTube entertains as well as informs.
Effective sites make their purpose clear on the home page (the fi rst page
of a website)—often as a slogan in the heading across the top of the page.
Figure 7.1 shows Overton’s home page. The slogan makes it clear that the
company sells products for boating and water sports. The dark blue colors
remind viewers of water, and the photo of canoes packed with gear support
the image of family fun.
Image not available due to copyright restrictions
Writing for the Web | 169
Who Are Your Readers?
Online readers come from all over the world, with English, Chinese, Spanish,
and Japanese as the four most popular languages. The audience may include
many readers looking for news headlines on MSN.com or a single stock
broker looking for Exxon Mobil’s performance in the S&P 500.
Defi ning the audience for your web-based project will help you get started
on your writing. Who is your target audience? Describe this audience
as specifically as you can. What are the demographics, or defining
characteristics, of your audience? In other words, where do they live;
how old are they; what is their income; are they male, female, married, or
single?
After you have defi ned your target audience, consider how you can best
appeal to your audience. Ask yourself these questions:
What information does my audience need, expect, and want?
◾
What will my audience do with this information?
◾
Some members of your audience will have the latest technology; others will
not. When planning your site, consider monitor settings, Internet connection
speeds, special requirements of hand-held devices, and browsers used by
your target audience. Plan for a variety of technology setups and test your
page in different browsers (for example, Internet Explorer® and Mozilla
Firefox®).
Keep in mind that anyone anywhere in the world can read whatever you
put on a web page. You may think that you are selling hand tools to the
residents of East Texas, but do not be surprised to receive orders from China
or Northern Ireland. Remember, the Internet is always open to anyone with a
computer and an Internet connection.
STOP AND THINK
How do visitors read a page on the Web? What issues should a web designer be
concerned about when planning a web page?
ORGANIZING AND DESIGNING WEB PAGES
Now that you have a clear purpose and a good understanding of your target
audience, it is time to organize your material and design your page.
Organizing Web Pages
To begin organizing your website, use sticky notes or index cards to list
everything you want to include—no more than one item per note or card.
Group your items into similar categories, considering the importance of
each idea to your users. Place your notes on a white board or bulletin board
so you can move them around until you have an outline that works—with
topics and subtopics. Common ways to organize information on a website
are by category, task, product, date/time, or department.
What is your favorite
website? What features
make the site stand out?
Describe the page—the kind
of information, the colors, the
graphics. Is the page easy to
read? Do you have an easy
time ﬁ nding information on
this site? Why or why not?
Warm Up
170 | Chapter 7
Once you have an outline, you can decide how to structure
your website. A simple site may move forward in a linear
fashion from one page to the next, similar to a fl owchart.
Other sites organize pages in a hierarchy, similar to an
organizational chart. In the hierarchy, information fl ows
progressively from “top” to “bottom” from the home page
to a second or third tier in increasing levels of detail. Web
design software such as Adobe® Dreamweaver® and Microsoft®
Expression® Web 3 provides tools for setting up the structure
for a website.
However you organize your pages, you will need to plan for
a system of hyperlinks. Hyperlinks, also called links, are a
word, phrase, or graphic used to link, or join, pages within a
site or to an external site, allowing viewers to move easily from
page to page. Depending on the browser settings, hyperlinks
can be a different color, underlined, or graphical. They are
activated by scrolling over a word and/or clicking. The goal is
to make information accessible in three or four mouse clicks.
External links can enrich a subject with information from another site and
reduce content on a page. However, if you plan to use external links, you
will want to inform your readers that they are leaving your site and moving
to another one. If you use an external link, make sure the link works. It is
frustrating for viewers to click on a dead link that does not take them to the
page you intended. There is no copyright infringement for providing links to
other sites. However, it is illegal to provide a link to a site representing any
form of illegal activity.
Not every site makes use of external links, but every site should include
a clear system of links to take viewers to pages within the site. Without
clear navigation, readers can get lost, wondering how to get back to a page
they found interesting. Table 7.1 explains some common ways to provide
internal links.
To ﬁ nd current articles about all aspects
of technical communication, including
web design and web writing, go to the
NET Bookmark for Chapter 7.
Search the articles, looking for advice
about blogging, FAQs, wikis, or
discussion forums. Print one article,
read it, and summarize it. Share your
summary in an oral presentation to your
classmates.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Claudia is setting up a website for her floral business, Claudia’s Creations.
She is in a hurry to get the site up and running. She wants to show some
of the sprays, wedding bouquets, and dish gardens she has created, but
she cannot find the pictures she took of them. So she searches the Web
and finds designs that she likes on two websites: Floral Fantasia and
Flowers by Chenda. Claudia decides to use some of the designs from those
sites on her own website until she finds her misplaced pictures or takes
new ones.
Think Critically
What might happen if Claudia’s customers discover that she used flower
designs from other sites?
Focus on
Ethics
Writing for the Web | 171
Figure 7.2 illustrates links—including navigation bars, drop-down menus,
and search features—on the home page of Georgia’s offi cial state website.
Home Page Link
A hyperlink back to the first page of a site. A home page link
should be on every page of a site.
Previous Page/Next
Page
A hyperlink to help readers go back one screen and forward
to the next screen.
Breadcrumb Trails
Hyperlinks in a row near the top of the page that show
visitors the links between the page being viewed and the
home page. The viewer can click any link in the trail to move
back quickly in the hierarchy. A good visual clue about
linking relationships, it should be used in addition to other
navigation tools.
Site Map
Hyperlinks that show a hierarchal list (word, phrase, or
graphic) of information on the site—similar to a table of
contents. Users can click a link to view a specific page quickly
without having to go through multiple levels of pages.
Navigation Bar
A list of links—words, tabs, or pictures—that span the top,
sides, or bottom of a page and direct users to other pages.
Drop-Down Menu
A word or phrase, usually at the top of a page, with options
that open, or “drop down,” when a user clicks the word or
the arrow. Drop-down menus are useful because the navi-
gation does not clutter the page, yet the options are still
available.
Search
A feature that allows the user to enter keywords and search
for pages in the site.
Table 7.1
Figure 7.2 System of Links on a Home Page
Navigation Bar
Drop-down
Menu
Site Map
Search Features
172 | Chapter 7
Designing Web Pages
If users do not have a good experience the fi rst time they access a site, they
may not return. Consider usability—the ease with which an audience can
access and use a site—as the top design principle. In addition to ease of use,
web pages should look attractive—uncluttered, symmetrical, and inviting.
Use the principles discussed next when designing your website.
Header
Create a header, the banner spanning the top of a web page, to set the
appropriate image and tone for your site. A site advertising scented candles
may use a photo of lit candles, pastel colors, and a simple script font to create
a relaxing scene. A site advertising sports cars, on the other hand, might use
bright colors, a photo of a red Corvette, and a bold font to evoke excitement.
Page Layout
To help readers scan for relevant information, organize information under
relevant headings. If your page is too long, divide the information into
multiple shorter pages with corresponding links to those pages. If you cannot
break up the long pages, place the most important information—the title,
purpose, key navigational elements, and search features—near the top so
readers see it before scrolling vertically. Do not set up pages so visitors have
to scroll horizontally.
Line Length
A shorter line length reduces eye movement needed to scan the text. The
ideal line length is approximately half the width of the screen, or between
50 and 70 characters (or 10 to 12 words) per line.
Graphics
Graphics break up the text, attract the reader’s attention, and offer instant
identifi cation with the purpose of the website. Use graphics to provide visual
relief, to support your content and image, and to make the site attractive.
A site focusing on the fun and challenge of a rock climbing club would not
use a photo of a woman on the side of a wall panicked at the prospect of
rappelling back down.
Graphics take time to load, and too many graphics may discourage people
from investigating a site. To speed up the download time of graphics, use
one of the following formats for compressing fi les: GIF (Graphics Interchange
Format), JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group), or PNG (Portable
Network Graphics). Use smaller logos as opposed to larger background logos.
If more detail is needed, enable users to click the picture to see the full size.
Multimedia
Many pages use animation (text or graphics that move), audio, and video to
make a page more interesting. Although the movement and audio may look
and sound good, use them sparingly to support your message. Too much
movement may annoy the reader, and if the extra graphics result in the page
taking a long time to load, you may lose visitors.
Writing for the Web | 173
Tables
Use tables to organize text and graphics. Tables give the page a uniform, clean,
professional appearance. Data can go inside cells, and one table can be nested
inside another. Invisible tables form the skeleton that holds the site together.
Borders
Use borders around the page to draw boundaries between sections or omit
borders for a more seamless look.
Fonts
Font sizes and styles affect screen legibility. Sans serif fonts are usually
recommended for online text because they look more distinct on a screen.
Avoid all capital letters and boldfaced blocks of text because these styles
slow down the reader and are the equivalent of YELLING.
As with printed text, you can emphasize important words or phrases with
boldface or italics as long as you do not go overboard. Be wary of using
underlining. Most viewers associate it with links and expect to be able to
click to access another page.
Colors
Use colors to help create an inviting site. As you know, colors evoke a variety
of emotional responses. Color should refl ect the site’s purpose and take into
account the target audience’s cultural associations with color. For example,
red, often associated with the devil in the United States, is the color of
wealth and good luck in China.
Consider, too, the color wheel and use colors that complement one
another—for example, yellow and purple, and blue and orange. You want to
keep colors to a minimum and use a neutral, white, or very dark background
color with contrasting colors for the text. Use accent colors to direct visitors
to important content.
Consistency
You teach the user how to read your site by repeating certain patterns.
Repetition allows readers to anticipate the site’s structure. To achieve
consistency, make sure your pages look similar and use the same design
features positioned in the same place on every page. A company name and
logo that appears in the top left corner of one page, for example, should
appear in the top left corner of every page. If the text is dark blue on a light
blue background, do not experiment, for example, by changing the scheme
on another page to dark blue text on a white background.
Accessibility
Whenever possible, follow Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0.
These guidelines are part of the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI). Its goal
is to make web content available to users with a wide range of disabilities,
including visual and hearing impairments, learning disabilities, cognitive and
movement limitations, speech disabilities, and combinations of disabilities.
174 | Chapter 7
The MyPyramid home page shown in Figure 7.3 uses three vertical panels.
The middle panel uses a white background with black sans serif text of
1 through 11 words per line. The left and right panels use blues and greens,
colors that depict calmness and good health. The pyramid logo represents
the colors of the various food groups and reminds the reader of the
government-sponsored food pyramid. Each page in the site uses the same
header across the top, the same top and left navigation bars, the same
search feature, and the same three-panel design. The site’s statement about
accessibility (not shown in the fi gure) can be found by clicking the link at
the bottom of the web page.
STOP AND THINK
List at least five design principles for the Web. How should color be used? What
are some technology considerations?
WRITING TEXT FOR THE WEB
In many ways, writing for the Web is similar to writing text for any other
technical document. But remember, a web page is viewed on a screen, not
on an 8½" 3 11" sheet of paper. The screen infl uences all pages in important
ways. Writing scannable text will help your readers fi nd what they need.
Strategies for All Pages
Use the strategies beginning on the next page to keep your pages organized
and focused on your audience.
How do you read a book?
How do you read a web
page? Do you read them the
same way? Explain.
Warm Up
Figure 7.3 Example of a Well-Designed Page
Writing for the Web | 175
Page Title
Give each page its own short, descriptive title—something
visitors can read quickly in a browser title bar or history list.
On the Federal Emergency Management (FEMA) website, for
example, each page has a unique title, such as “Plan Ahead,”
“Disaster Information,” and “Apply for Assistance.” If you visit
these pages, they will be listed in the order in which they were
viewed under “History” in the browser window. FEMA and its
logo appear in the upper left corner of each page, though, to tell
readers they are still on the FEMA website. If readers bookmark
a page (or save to Favorites), the page title is stored. Some
search tools use page titles in their search results.
Audience
Know your target audience and write to that audience. Compare
these two sentences from a job hunting website for displaced
workers:
Original: The JDW site has been set up to help displaced
workers fi nd jobs in their immediate geographical areas whether
their expertise is in construction, sales, or engineering.
Revision: If you have lost your job, we can help—no matter
what your area of expertise or where you live.
The original example talks about the website. The revised example talks
directly to the reader.
Also avoid jargon unless you know your reader will understand it.
Inverted Pyramid
State important points before you provide any detailed supporting
information. At the website of the Salt Plains National Wildlife Refuge,
the home page begins with what the Salt Plains Wildlife Refuge
is and why it exists. Then readers learn about the size of the
salt fl at, two related habitats, and upcoming events—all in order
of importance. The inverted pyramid allows viewers to see the
most important content before they scroll down the page.
Facts, Not Hype
To keep your web page as informative as possible, state the facts
and avoid the hype of an overdone sales appeal. People want
information they can use.
Original: Are you sitting at home wondering when you’ll meet
Prince Charming? Skin Rejuvenation promises to restore skin
scarred from acne or sun damage. Order your jar today and see
how your life changes.
Revision: Skin Rejuvenation moisturizer is easily absorbed, thereby reducing
winter chafi ng by 15%.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
An RSS (Rich Site Summary or Really Simple
Syndication) is a feed or format that regularly
updates web content. Just as a single
television program is syndicated and sent to
many viewers, an RSS is syndicated, too, and
sent to many readers. Subscribers receive
notices of new content for the sites in their
feed. For example, a health feed on Google
News provides a summary of current articles
about health. Search engines and news
sites organize RSS links by content area (for
example, Top Stories, Middle East, Business,
and Entertainment).
Think Critically
What is the beneﬁ t of subscribing to an RSS?
TYPICAL READER
A person anywhere in the world with a
computer and an Internet connection who is
scanning pages, clicking links, and expecting
to ﬁ nd speciﬁ c information quickly and easily.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Organizing information, writing scannable
text, designing attractive pages, and providing
users several ways to access the information.
176 | Chapter 7
Original Phrases
Avoid the web cliché—the “Click here” or “Check out this site.” A link can be
easily made a seamless part of a sentence, as the following examples show:
Original: Click here to learn how variations in temperature affect the success
of gel coat application.
Revision: Variations in temperature affect the success of gel coat application.
Standard English
Use standard English and follow rules of correct punctuation and usage.
Nothing ruins the credibility of a web page more than errors.
Scannable Text
Except when the site posts an article or a resume, say as much as you can in as
few words as possible. Your goal is to create scannable text to enable readers
to locate important words and phrases—or keywords—quickly and effortlessly.
To reduce words and make your text scannable, follow the suggestions
discussed next.
Short Paragraphs
Use short paragraphs that stand out and can be quickly scanned and
absorbed, usually six to eight lines. A single, well-worded sentence can
stand alone as a paragraph. See the visual relief in the thumbnail sketch
in Figure 7.4 where one longer paragraph is separated into three.
Short Sentences
While sentences can vary in length, aim for an average of 20 to 25 words
per sentence. The revised sentence below is much clearer and easier to read
when it is written as two shorter sentences.
Original: Set in the rustic Craghill Mountains near the small town of Wilcox,
Tennessee, Spring Village, conveniently located close to a transportation
center, medical center, and cultural alcove, is a caring community for seniors.
Revision: Set in the rustic Craghill Mountains near the small town of Wilcox,
Tennessee, Spring Village is a caring community for seniors. It is conveniently
located close to a transportation center, medical center, and cultural alcove.
Headings
Use short but informative headings to help readers identify topics and decide at
a glance what they want to read. Headings also provide transitions to the next
topic, alerting the reader to shift from one idea to another. For example, to help
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
Figure 7.4 Long Versus Short Paragraphs
Writing for the Web | 177
readers locate information in its web page, the Community Orchestra provides
three headings: Upcoming Performances, How to Join, and Director’s Notes.
Paragraphs to Lists
Use bulleted lists to break up paragraphs, reduce the amount of text, and
emphasize important content. The following list of e-mail “don’ts” is easier
to scan than the paragraph with the same information.
Original: Respect your e-mail recipient’s privacy and time by not sending
chain e-mails. They are hoaxes and waste your reader’s time. It is
presumptuous to send attachments or other people’s e-mail addresses unless
you have permission to do so. Sending multiple postings to people who are
not interested wastes time and takes up storage space. Finally, do not “Reply
to All” unless it is necessary.
Revision: DON’T
Send chain e-mails.
◾
Send attachments or other people’s e-mail addresses unless you have
◾
permission to do so.
Send multiple postings to people who are not interested.
◾
“Reply to All” unless it is necessary.
◾
Keywords
To help search engines and your audience fi nd your website, in approximately
the fi rst 50 words of your text, use keywords, important words that indicate
subject areas. To fi nd useful information, readers scan text looking for keywords
and phrases. Keywords for a mythology website include Joseph Campbell, The
Hero with a Thousand Faces, myths, hero, Departure, Initiation, Return, Call to
Adventure, and Healing and Reconciliation. Which of the following versions
does a better job of including more keywords in the fi rst 50 words?
Original: Joseph Campbell compared myths of the hero from all over the
world. He found similarities in the myths and identifi ed 12 stages of the
hero’s journey. Below are Campbell’s stages with a short explanation. The
explanations and stages are typical of the journey but may not be found in all
[50 words] myths. The stories and their plots are similar, but the characters and
circumstances differ. Campbell’s work is compelling. For more information,
see his landmark book, [75 words] The Hero with a Thousand Faces.
Revision: In his book The Hero with a Thousand Faces, Joseph Campbell
identifi es 12 stages in myths of the hero’s journey. The journey takes place
in three parts: hero’s Departure, Initiation into the journey, and Return
to improve society. From the Call to Adventure through Healing and
Reconciliation, the hero receives [50 words] Supernatural Aid, passes into
the Darkness of the Realm of Night. . . .
In the original version, Campbell’s book is not even mentioned until after
75 words into the passage. The second passage is more concise, relaying
signifi cant information in every sentence.
All of these suggestions have one goal—to make information useful and
accessible.
Complete the Paragraphs to
Lists worksheet available at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the link
for Chapter 7; then click Data
Files.
178 | Chapter 7
SPECIAL WEB PAGES
The Web offers a new medium for established ways of communicating. The
type of writing is not altogether new, but when the audience and medium
change, good writers adapt. The result? New avenues of writing for existing
genres. Five of these adaptations are outlined next: home page, blog, FAQ,
wiki, and discussion forum.
Home Page
Think of your website as a theme park. Your park may have many areas—
rides, a petting zoo, edutainment, restaurants, and more—or a single
nature trail. The home page of your website is like the entrance to the park.
Because you want many visitors, you design an inviting entrance, one that
refl ects the theme and offers basic information to help people navigate
the site. Like a home page, there may be several ways to get from one area
to the next inside the park. Use the following tips when writing text for
a home page:
Get your reader’s attention and announce your purpose.
◾
Use a catchy
phrase and meaningful slogan. For example, a website devoted to
transferring photos and videos to DVDs might replace its title and slogan
with something more appealing, as follows:
Original: title “Photo Transfer”; slogan “We turn photos into DVDs.”
Revision: title “Keepsake Photos”; slogan “Keeping your memories
safe.”
Write a short introduction and conclusion.
◾
The introduction
explains the purpose of your website. The conclusion brings the
page to a close. Consider the introduction and conclusion on the
Keepsake Photos site.
Introduction: “We transfer photos, 8mm fi lm, and video into quality
DVDs.”
Conclusion: “We’d like to help you preserve your special memories.”
(after explaining about the company, its guarantee, and its contact
information)
Consider links to short online articles.
◾
You may want to include
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) and Tips on your website. On the
Keepsake Photos site, the FAQ might answer questions about how to mail
the photos or videos and Tips might tell readers how to safeguard their
photos and videos.
STOP AND THINK
Explain three overall writing strategies for web pages. Explain five ways to write
scannable text.
To show that you have
already practiced strategies
for special kinds of web
writing, describe your
experiences with one of these
situations: (1) choosing a
theme for a prom, a dance,
a reunion, or a holiday
event; (2) keeping a journal;
(3) answering the same
questions over and over;
(4) collaborating on a project;
or (5) writing answers to
discussion questions.
Warm Up
Writing for the Web | 179
Include essential information.
◾
A home page should include the following
information:
• Contact information telling readers how to contact the owner of the
site—e-mail, phone number, and/or street address
• A logo or graphic that helps “brand” the site, creating product and
company recognition at a glance
• An About section describing the organization and providing some of its
history
• A system of navigation to help readers fi nd their way around the site
• A date (usually at the bottom) showing the last time the site was updated
• Any disclaimers or privacy/security statements—what kind of
information may be collected by the site and what monitoring systems
may be in use to track information
Figure 7.5 shows the home page of Hold Fast Custom Builders, a small
construction business. The page has the characteristics of an effective home
page: a logo, a slogan, and essential information.
Blogs
Similar to a journal or diary, a blog (short for weblog) is a website with
periodic commentary or news posted in reverse chronological order. A blogger
is usually an individual with special knowledge or passion about a topic.
Because viewers can respond, a blog is not only a source of information, but
also an online community. In addition, a blog may include links and graphics.
There are as many blogs as there are content areas. A doctor posts her
administrative struggles, a news reporter posts commentaries about the
day’s events, and a businessperson posts progress on the development of a
new product. The writing style used on a blog is informal. As with any web
material, blogs should be read with a critical eye. Some blog “conversations”
provide current, credible, and insightful news. Others merely vent and ramble.
Complete the Critiquing
a Web Page worksheet
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 7;
then click Data Files.
Figure 7.5 Example of a Home Page
180 | Chapter 7
Many sites host blogs, including Livejournal.com, blogger.com, and Techcrunch.
com, along with major search engines such as MSN and Yahoo!.
To post a credible blog,
Write blogs on topics you know about or about which you are passionate.
◾
Post regularly so that you build up a following, but do not overwhelm
◾
readers with too many posts.
Create a short name that is easy to remember.
◾
Communicate with people on other blogs.
◾
Post meaningful, accurate blogs.
◾
Make your blog site attractive and interesting.
◾
Let your personality come through.
◾
Use
◾
RSS (Really Simple Syndication), standardized web feed formats to
send the content of your blog directly to your readers. By using RSS, your
readers will not have to visit your website to get updates.
FAQ
FAQ, pronounced fak or f-a-q, is an acronym for Frequently Asked Question
(and Frequently Answered Question). A FAQ is what its name implies—
questions asked often enough to warrant publishing so that other people can
benefi t from the answers. The assumption is that if a suffi cient number of
people have asked these questions, the questions must be common enough
that others will have the questions too. FAQs are found all over the Internet.
There is even an archive of FAQs at www.faqs.org/faqs.
Julian Mills, a local politician and long-standing member of the Sandhills
community, is on the Board of Trustees for Hope Center Hospital. He
maintains a blog on his political initiatives, including the construction of the
hospital’s new cardiac wing. So far, he has expressed concern over the cost
of the wing, the many delays, and some decisions about equipment. Overall,
though, he supports the construction and is proud to have played a role
in such a state-of-the art facility. A local reporter, Sabrina Klein, also keeps
a blog about area events. Her husband happens to be an architect for the
company contracted to build the cardiac wing. In her blog, Sabrina criticizes
Julian, saying, “Mr. Mills . . . nitpicks about decisions and micromanages the
day-to-day operations of the board. He knows nothing about construction
and is clearly pushing a political agenda. He should step down from the
board.” Julian, understandably angered by the remarks, wonders what, if
anything, he should do about the remarks.
Think Critically
What factors should Mr. Mills consider before he decides whether to respond?
Communication
Dilemma
Writing for the Web | 181
You may want to use a FAQ for a website. Or you can post a FAQ on Yahoo!
Answers, a site that hosts a variety of FAQs maintained periodically by
authorities in various fi elds. If you routinely respond to customer service
calls, written FAQs can help you answer questions about your product.
To compile a FAQ,
Determine the most frequently asked questions. What do your readers
◾
ask? What do your customers ask? What do they want to know?
Ask the question the way your readers will ask the question. Use the
◾
readers’ terms—the readers’ vocabulary.
Set up a consistent format to set questions apart from the answers—
◾
perhaps boldfacing questions and providing adequate white space
between questions and answers.
Keep the answers relatively short. One or two sentences is preferable, but
◾
no more than a couple of paragraphs. Embed links to other pages on your
site or to external sites for more detailed information.
Update your FAQ periodically
◾
to keep the information
current.
Organize questions in order of
◾
importance or in chronological
order for your reader.
Proofread for clarity and
◾
correctness to keep your FAQ
professional.
On a website, place the FAQ
◾
where your readers can easily
fi nd it—in links on the side, at
the bottom, near Help items,
or close to information about
which readers may be curious.
Wikis
A wiki uses special software that allows a number of users to collaboratively
author web pages, usually according to a set of guidelines. Some wikis, such
as Wikipedia and BookShelved, provide open access to anyone. Other wikis
are closed, and only people granted access can contribute. Medpedia, for
example, is a medical wiki that allows only professionals to edit content. A
wiki can foster creative collaboration for a process, such as programming
code. Writers use wikis, too, to post articles and allow other writers to edit
them.
If you are interested in participating in a wiki,
Read several articles so you know how the text is written and edited.
◾
Become familiar with the process for editing articles in the wiki.
◾
Keep your tone polite and civil—even when you disagree.
◾
Keep the tone neutral and the information factual.
◾
©PricelessPhotos, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
182 | Chapter 7
Work toward consensus as you edit.
◾
Include references for information from other sources.
◾
Discussion Forums
Operating like an electronic bulletin board, a discussion forum is a place
where users can discuss items of interest or get specifi c questions answered.
On the Apple website, for example, a discussion forum attempts to answer
questions about Apple products and applications. A person who is having
diffi culty downloading iTunes might post a question and receive responses
through this forum. Online discussion forums exist for nearly every topic
imaginable—the stock market, art, architecture, business, family, science,
and more. The major news networks post online discussion forums. In
addition, forums can be found on Google Groups and are an integral part of
online classes. Look for a discussion forum that meets your needs.
To interact with a discussion forum,
Read other posts to see how people generally respond.
◾
Provide as much information as possible when posting a concern.
◾
Provide accurate information when responding to a concern.
◾
Think critically about others’ responses. Not every response is credible.
◾
Be concise.
◾
Whatever kind of text you write for the Web, keep in mind two guiding
principles—the needs of your readers and the limited space on the screen. To
keep readers engaged, design attractive sites that support your message and
deliver valuable information. To help readers fi nd the information they need,
write text that can be scanned quickly. The tips below are sound advice for
any technical document, but they are imperative for the web writer. Strive
for a successful technical style by using:
Concise wording.
◾
Short paragraphs.
◾
An inverted pyramid (main idea fi rst).
◾
Meaningful headings and titles.
◾
Bulleted lists.
◾
Standard English.
◾
STOP AND THINK
Name five types of writing assignments adapted especially for the Web. Choose
two and describe them in detail.
Writing for the Web | 183
Chapter 7
Review
SUMMARY
1. When creating a web page, know how users read and interact with
material, determine your purpose, defi ne your audience, and fi nd out
the technology limitations of your audience.
2. When organizing and designing a web page, choose a system of
internal links, create web pages that are easy to use and attractive,
and keep the design consistent and accessible.
3. When writing web pages, create unique page titles, write to your
audience, organize using an inverted pyramid, compile factual
content, use original language, and construct scannable text.
4. When writing home pages, blogs, wikis, FAQs, or discussion forums,
follow established protocols.
Checklist
Have I defi ned my audience?
◾
Have I written web pages that adjust to the unusual way readers read them?
◾
Have I considered the technology limitations of my audience?
◾
Have I determined my purpose and included it in a slogan on the website?
◾
Do my text and graphics support my purpose?
◾
Have I organized my website using a workable system of internal links?
◾
Have I designed attractive web pages with easy-to-locate information for
◾
visitors to my site?
Do my pages load quickly?
◾
Have I written text that uses unique page titles, is written directly to my
◾
audience, organizes material in an inverted pyramid, is factual, avoids
clichés, and uses standard English?
Have I written scannable text with short paragraphs, informative headings,
◾
lists, and keywords in the fi rst 50 words?
Have I followed standard protocol for my home page, blog, FAQ, wiki, and
◾
discussion forum?
184 | Chapter 7
Build Your Foundation
1. Rewrite these sentences, breaking them into shorter sentences and
deleting extra words.
a. We offer Spanish tutorials and practice for the beginner as well as the
intermediate Spanish learner on a variety of topics so a traveler can
feel comfortable traveling in a Spanish-speaking country.
b. Take time to visit our website at www.homedezigns.com to see the
latest collection of living room, bedroom, and kitchen furniture along
with accessories such as lamps, vases, and art—from contemporary to
traditional.
c. Because water conservation is important, there are many ways people
can help conserve water, including taking showers instead of taking
baths and running the washer and running the dishwasher only when
they are full.
d. Spruce up your resume, network with the right people, and organize
your job search to increase your chances of fi nding a job so it does not
take you the normal four to six months to fi nd one.
2. Brainstorm possible slogans, color schemes, graphics, and links for one
of these sites. Conduct research if you need to familiarize yourself with
the type of business. Share your written plan with the class.
a. Nehu’s Chiropractic Care, new to the area, wants a site that describes
services and teaches the public about the value of chiropractic care.
b. Krischler’s Insurance Services offers personal and commercial policies,
including car, home, long-term care, life, and commercial, for a small
community.
c. Beach Getaway is a real estate agency specializing in ocean view
rentals for family vacations.
d. Eastern Music Company sells musical instruments to school bands.
e. Helping Handz is a charity organization in North Dakota that collects
winter coats for children in grades K–12.
3. Improve the following block of text by breaking it up into three
paragraphs and shortening some of the sentences.
Global warming—the explanation goes something like this: Energy
from the sun heats the earth, and then some of that energy is sent back
into space in the form of infrared radiation. A portion of that outgoing
radiation, though, is blocked from escaping into space by the earth’s
relatively thin atmosphere—a good thing because the infrared radiation
that remains stabilizes the earth’s temperature. A problem occurs when
the atmosphere, subjected to increasing amounts of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases, thickens to trap more of the sun’s infrared
energy, preventing its escape from Earth. More trapped energy raises
global temperatures—thus the term global warming. Global warming
can drastically alter the climate. The predictions are frightening: melting
polar ice caps, rising ocean levels, category 5 hurricanes. Are these dire
predictions true? Are we really in a period of global warming? The body
of scientifi c evidence does suggest that global warming is a reality.
4. Go to About Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:About)
to learn more about this open source wiki. Make a list of what you learn.
Writing for the Web | 185
Your Turn
1. Create a sketch of a home page on a topic of interest. Draw your page, cut
pictures out of magazines, download clip art, write or key names of links,
and come up with the slogan. If you are familiar with HTML code or a
web authoring system such as Dreamweaver®, design the page yourself.
2. Find two websites—one that follows most of the guidelines presented in
the chapter and one that does not. Write a one-page analysis explaining
why one website is more effective than the other. Use bulleted lists to set
up your comparison and introduce each list with a couple of sentences.
3. Write a FAQ on a topic of your choice. Choose from your school, your
major, your job, or any topic with which you are familiar.
4. Use the topic below to practice the collaboration required by a wiki.
Working with four of your classmates, enter the passage in a word
processor. Send the fi le to each member of your group—perhaps over
several days. Each person should fi nd one or two errors and add one or
two pieces of information to make the passage more interesting. Remember
to provide references if you quote or introduce new information.
Henry David Thoreau was born July 17, 1812, and died May 6 1862. He
was an American poet, essayist, naturalist, and song writer. He was a
strict abolitionist. His transcentral views can be seen in his lectures and
most notably in his book Weldene. Perhaps his most infl uential work is
“Civil Disobedience” which was inspired by his time spent in Portugal.
“Civil Disobedience” infl uenced such political leaders as George
Washington, Martin Luther King, and Mahatma Gradson.
5. For this mock wiki, work in groups of fi ve. In your group, pass around
the terms one at a time—perhaps over several days. Each person
defi nes two terms and adds one or two pieces of information or deletes
information that should be more accurate.
blog
wiki
breadcrumb trails
Wikipedia
RSS
hyperlink
discussion forum
keywords
6. Write a discussion response to these questions: How has the Internet
helped you in your education? What have you learned from this chapter?
7. Go to Google Groups at http://groups.google.com. Join a discussion
group that you fi nd interesting. Respond using the strategies presented in
the chapter. Print your responses and submit them to your instructor.
Community Connection
1. Write a FAQ about a topic related to your school or community—such as
how to establish residency, how to join a community group, or how to select
an area restaurant. Ask if your FAQ can be placed on the organization’s
website or place your FAQ in a central location such as a bulletin board.
2. Interview a blogger or a web designer. Ask about the challenges of
blogging or designing a website. Write a summary of the interview.
3. Find someone in your community who has little Internet experience.
Show that person how to conduct an online search. If necessary, meet at
a public place that has computers and an Internet connection.
186 | Chapter 8
Informative Reports
WRITE TO LEARN
Think about where you are on the path of your educational goals. Perhaps
your career will require a two-year associate or a four-year bachelor’s
degree—or a master’s or doctorate degree. Write several paragraphs
answering these questions: What have you achieved toward reaching your
educational goals? What do you still need to do to reach those goals? When
will you reach your goals? What problems are you experiencing? Your
audience can be your parents or guardians, a scholarship committee, or other
people who have supported your educational career.
Chapter
Goals
Write two types of summaries and an
◾
abstract
Create a mechanism description with a
◾
visual
Write a periodic report, a progress report,
◾
and a news release
Terms
abstracts, p. 189
◾
dateline, p. 206
◾
embargo, p. 205
◾
fiscal year, p. 195
◾
hook, p. 203
◾
mechanism description,
◾
p. 192
media, p. 201
◾
periodic reports, p. 195
◾
progress reports, p. 198
◾
PSAs, p. 201
◾
public relations, p. 201
◾
reporting period, p. 198
◾
spatial order, p. 193
◾
summary, p. 189
◾
Focus on Informative Reports
Read the sample informative report on the next page and answer these
questions:
What is its purpose? Does the writer ask the reader to do anything?
•
Can you determine the audience for whom this report was intended?
•
What would make this report more useful and easier to read?
•
In what fi elds might a report of this nature be needed?
•
What If?
The readers were lacking in a basic science background?
•
The subject of the technical description were an object, not a process?
•
The process description were more complex and longer?
•
The report were written in the future, when people no longer use or have
•
access to incandescent bulbs?
Informative Reports | 187
Sample Technical Process Description: How an Incandescent Lightbulb Works
Source: Frank B. Meyers, University of California, Berkley
Follows a chronological
order; tells how the bulb
works, not how to oper-
ate the bulb; uses specific
measurements and technical
vocabulary to explain the
process accurately and
precisely
Writing@Work
Paige Heller is a physical
therapist at an outpatient
orthopedic clinic in Sedona,
Arizona. She treats patients
daily and provides written
documentation for each visit, including daily evaluation
notes, periodic progress reports, and discharge summaries.
Paige’s writing must be clear and concise, yet thorough and
rich in detail. “A good physical therapy document needs to
be readable by a varied audience that includes the patient,
other physicians, and employers. These reports may also be
used for legal purposes, so they must include large amounts
of information in a small amount of writing.”
To write a report that is brief and that contains all necessary information, Paige
follows the “SOAP” formula for writing bulleted clinical notes. Each letter stands
for its own bulleted item in the note:
• S stands for subjective—the first bullet states what the patient reports.
• O stands for objective—the second bullet states what the therapist observes
and tests.
• A stands for assessment—the third bullet is an analysis of the S and O
points.
• P stands for plan—the last bullet is a future/intended course of treatment.
Just as Paige writes her reports so they are useful for other practicing therapists
and physicians, she must read others’ reports in order to provide the most
advanced and tested treatment possible. “Physical therapy is an evidence-based
practice, which means we dictate our treatments according to the results of
research and studies in the field. I frequently access online medical journals to
review such reports. I also read physician reports of surgeries or diagnostics
to better understand a patient’s condition or injury.” In other words, Paige’s
technical writing proficiency depends in part on her technical reading skills.
In turn, other physical therapy professionals rely on Paige’s technical writing
ability, which is why accurate documentation is so important.
Think Critically
1. Why are the S and O bullets critical in Paige’s physical therapy reports?
2. Why is the A bullet needed? Why is it important to assess the first two
bullets?
Printed with permission of Paige Heller
Courtesy of Paige Heller
188 | Chapter 8
Informative Reports | 189
GETTING STARTED ON INFORMATIVE REPORTS
Professionals in business and industry use specialized reports to convey
information about their work. This chapter presents the most frequently used
informative reports: summaries and abstracts, mechanism descriptions,
progress and periodic reports, and news releases. These specialized reports
use standard forms. Once you learn how to use them, you can develop
reports using information from jobs or personal experience.
SUMMARY AND ABSTRACT
A summary is a condensed version of a document. When writing an essay,
you generate details to develop or support a thesis and topic sentences.
Summaries require writers to do the opposite: keep only general information
and the most important details.
Abstracts are more condensed than summaries, often reducing documents to
a thesis. The length depends on the audience’s needs and expectations.
Some summaries and abstracts stand alone; others begin a longer technical
document. By condensing the report’s highlights before the audience reads
the details, summaries save coworkers time. People at upper levels of an
organization may choose to read only the summary sections of longer
reports. They do so because their interest is in the big picture or health of
the organization rather than the details or technical aspects of day-to-day
operations.
Some employees use summaries to stay on top of the latest research and
developments in their fields. These employees summarize publications
in the career field as they emerge and file them for future reference.
Figure 8.1 on the next page is an article that an employee reads so that the
employee can summarize it for his or her supervisor and fi les and for future
reference. Figure 8.2 on page 191 contains two summaries and
an abstract of the article in Figure 8.1.
To write a summary or an abstract:
1. When an oral presentation is given, take notes during the
presentation or soon afterward. Thus, you are less likely to
forget what the speaker said.
2. With a written document, read the document twice—or as
many times as necessary to fully understand the content. As
you read the second time, highlight the main ideas or cross
out everything (all details) except the main ideas. Paraphrase
main ideas. For longer summaries, choose a few important
details to include. For abstracts, condense the paraphrased
material.
3. In the summary’s fi rst sentence, include the thesis or main
point of the document using your own words and sentence
structure.
Recall the last movie or play
you watched. How would
you respond if a friend asked,
“What was the show about?”
Using what you remember
about the show, write the
answer you would give to
your friend.
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
Any person, whether manager, technician,
or client/customer, who wants access to
an overview of more detailed information,
whether a company report, a journal article, a
book, or another document.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Clearly presenting major ideas and, when
needed, essential supporting information
in a readable manner to enable users to
understand the central points of a longer
document.
190 | Chapter 8
Figure 8.1 Article to Be Summarized
Source: Elstein, David. United States. Dept. of Agriculture. “A Faster Way to Clean Roots.”
Agricultural Research: 2004 (52.1). Web. 10 Dec. 2009.
Informative Reports | 191
Figure 8.2 Examples of Summaries and Abstract
LONG SUMMARY OF “A FASTER WAY TO CLEAN ROOTS”
In “A Faster Way to Clean Roots,” David Elstein announces a technological breakthrough
for people who study plants and crop management. While scientists normally use con-
siderable time cleaning dirt from plant roots by hand before the plants can be studied,
a machine created by soil scientist Joseph G. Benjamin offers help.
Benjamin developed a device to rotate and clean 24 plants at once, decreasing the
need for scientists to handle the plants and speeding the process. During washing, the
machine dunks and shoots water at the roots but does not harm or change the root
system. The water takes the mud with it when it drains from the machine.
When the clean roots are removed from the new machine, Benjamin’s device uses a
fl atbed scanner, computer software, and mathematical equations to calculate the surface
area of the roots. However, the inventor notes that the machine is not as effective as the
human eye at distinguishing roots from other materials.
Benjamin based the design of his invention on a weed-seed washer invented by scientist
Lori J. Wiles and colleagues at the ARS Water Management Research Unit in Fort
Collins, Colorado.
ABSTRACT OF “A FASTER WAY TO CLEAN ROOTS”
In “A Faster Way to Clean Roots,” David Elstein announces a technological breakthrough
for people who study plants and crop management: soil scientist Joseph G. Benjamin’s
creation of a machine to clean soil and organic matter from plant roots without damag-
ing the roots.
SHORT SUMMARY OF “A FASTER WAY TO CLEAN ROOTS”
In “A Faster Way to Clean Roots,” David Elstein announces a technological breakthrough
for people who study plants and crop management. Before soil scientist Joseph G.
Benjamin’s creation of a machine to clean soil and organic matter from plant roots,
scientists had to painstakingly remove the dirt from the root system of plants they wanted
to study. Benjamin’s invention does not damage the roots, and it mechanizes and
speeds the preparation. Compared to other machines, Benjamin’s rotary-design wash
cycle prepares 24 samples for study faster and with less handling. When the plants are
clean, Benjamin’s device uses a fl atbed scanner, computer software, and mathematical
equations to calculate the roots’ surface area.
192 | Chapter 8
4. Make clear what you are summarizing. With an article, introduce the
source in the fi rst sentence by including the title and author’s name. For
a speech or meeting, credit the speaker in the opening sentence.
5. Decide whether your audience needs a few details or only main ideas.
For long summaries, include only details that are especially important.
For short summaries, leave out details. For abstracts, include only the
most important general ideas. Be concise. Reduce the original document
to the main idea in a few sentences.
6. Keep your summary information proportional to the original. If the
author spent four paragraphs on one topic and two paragraphs on
another, your summary should give proportional time and emphasis.
For example, in your summary or abstract, do not include more
information from the two-paragraph topic than from the four-paragraph
topic.
7. Write in present tense.
8. Paraphrase; do not copy word for word.
9. Quote sparingly, if at all, and use quotation marks correctly.
10. Provide transitions to keep the summary from sounding choppy.
Do not give your opinion. A summary or an abstract should be objective.
MECHANISM DESCRIPTION
A mechanism description describes the main parts of a device or machine.
It explains what the purpose of the mechanism and overall design is, what
the parts are, what they look like, and what their function is.
Mechanism descriptions are used in catalogs, instruction manuals, and
employee training. Examples of mechanisms in the workplace include
car parts, furniture, kitchen tools, doorstops, pencil sharpeners, and more
sophisticated machines such as an engine and a DVD player. Mechanism
descriptions are often included with instructions in product packaging.
Consumers can fi nd a mechanism description in a manual that comes with
new equipment, such as a computer or can opener. This description tells
what the parts are, how they fi t together, and what their functions are.
Technicians and operators use the description to become familiar with the
characteristics of the machine and to troubleshoot problems. New employees
use a mechanism description to learn job responsibilities and safety
procedures. Decision makers use mechanism descriptions to reach informed
decisions, perhaps comparing current equipment with equipment proposed
for purchase.
STOP AND THINK
If a summary includes three of an article’s five main points, is it effective? Why
or why not?
Examine the pen or pencil
you are using to take notes.
Brieﬂ y describe its parts and
their functions.
Warm Up
Informative Reports | 193
Figure 8.3 on the following page is a mechanism description that
a community college electronics student produced to demonstrate
his understanding of an everyday object that people use. The
audience for the report was the instructor, other electronics
students, and anyone curious about how things work.
To write a mechanism description,
1. Take notes, describing every part in detail. Assume that you
are on the telephone. You must describe a mechanism that the
listener has not seen.
2. Use spatial order. That is, explain the parts from left to right,
right to left, top to bottom, bottom to top, or whatever pattern
is logical.
3. Open with an overall physical description of the mechanism,
a statement that identifi es its general purpose (what it is
designed to do), and a preview of its parts.
4. Divide the mechanism into its parts and discuss each part under a
separate heading. Use proper names of the parts. Place headings in the
same order you used in the preview list.
5. Provide a precise physical description of the parts. Include size, color,
location, and material (what the mechanism is made of).
6. Include the purpose or function of each part.
7. Provide a graphic of the mechanism. Include exploded (enlarged) views of
parts that are too small to be easily seen. Add callouts to label each part.
8. Use active voice whenever possible.
Do not explain how to operate the mechanism. Instead, describe what it
does, what it looks like, what its parts are, and what they look like and do.
TYPICAL READER
Either a technician or a professional needing
technical speciﬁ cations for a mechanism;
any person who needs to understand how a
mechanism works.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Writing thorough and clear descriptions and
explanations in a readable format with accu-
rate, precise details, including measurements,
materials, and appropriate graphics.
Blend Images/JupiterImages
194 | Chapter 8
STOP AND THINK
In a mechanism description, should a writer describe a metal disk as (a) about
the size of a penny or (b) 1/2" in diameter? What organizational pattern is used
in mechanism descriptions?
Figure 8.3 Example of a Mechanism Description
Figure 1. 60-watt incandescent lightbulb
Introduction: a general over-
view of the bulb, its purpose,
the diagram, and the parts,
which become headings for
the remainder of the report
Basic parts identified in
callouts in the diagram
Parts described in detail
using precise measurements
and numerical speci fications
Glass bulb
Filament
Inert gas
Informative Reports | 195
PERIODIC REPORTS
Periodic reports explain accomplishments for all projects of a work group
or of an entire organization over a specifi ed time period. For instance,
when you listened to your governor make a State of the State address or the
President make a State of the Union address, you heard a periodic report.
These speeches explore the many ongoing projects of the state or nation
for the year. Periodic reports may cover different periods: a week (weekly),
a month (monthly), three months (quarterly), or six months (semiannually).
Businesses and nonprofi t organizations use periodic reports to inform
shareholders, clients, vendors, donors, and employees of the organization’s
accomplishments and challenges. Figure 8.4 on the following two pages is an
example of a periodic report prepared by a student intern.
To write periodic reports,
1. Consider all activities and accomplishments of the organization for the
specifi ed time period. Begin by noting the time period. Are you sharing
information about the last two weeks, the past month, or the fi scal year?
(A fi scal year is the operating year, such as the academic year, which
often runs from July 1 through June 30.)
2. Meet your audience’s needs. What are the audience’s concerns, history
with the writer and the project or organization, and roles?
3. Organize tasks so you can report them logically. Once lists are complete,
categories of tasks become subheadings under a major heading. Organize
so the reader can fi nd important information easily.
4. Format for the audience. Many longer periodic reports are manuscript-
formatted, appearing like an essay or a book with a title. These reports
offer formality and distance appropriate for a diverse audience. When
written for an internal reader, a short periodic report may be formatted as
a memo. For an external reader, the report may be formatted as a letter.
5. For the introduction, develop an overview that briefl y presents the
highlights of the report. Mention each idea included in a major heading.
Also state the reporting period, the time for which the document
describes activities or progress.
6. For the body, compose a section for each activity category
or type of work undertaken during the reporting period,
with section headings and sometimes subheadings
organized from most important to least important. For
instance, the monthly activity report of a U.S. Navy recruiter
might include the following work areas (and headings):
Job Fairs, School-Based Meetings, Offi ce Conferences, and
Public Speaking Events. Under each heading, the recruiter
describes, from most to least important, accomplishments
during the reporting period. In the rest of the report, the
recruiter may note problems encountered.
7. In the conclusion, highlight any key ideas and refer to the
next report.
Consider the organizations
you belong to, participate
in, or are concerned about.
How do you learn about the
status, or “health,” of the
organization?
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
Any person involved with or interested in
the organization, such as employees or
shareholders, who would like to know about
the activities and accomplishments of the
organization.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Presenting a logically organized, detailed
description of what an organization has done
during the reporting period.
196 | Chapter 8
8. Check for accuracy, particularly in statistics and names.
9. Use lists, numbered or set in columns, whenever possible to ensure
easier reading.
10. Divide long discussions into paragraphs to refl ect groups of ideas.
Periodic report writers should not include their opinions, instead providing
facts and allowing readers to draw their own conclusions.
Figure 8.4 Periodic Report
Gives highlights of entire
report
Provides as many specifics
as possible; is organized
from most important
information to least
important information
Informative Reports | 197
Figure 8.4 Periodic Report, cont.
STOP AND THINK
What three types of information are usually included in the introduction of a
periodic report?
Looks forward to the next
report and meeting
Notes and explains problem
area
198 | Chapter 8
PROGRESS REPORTS
Like periodic reports, progress reports are documents that report progress
for a period of time. Unlike periodic reports, which cover all of an
organization’s work, a progress report describes what has been done during
a specifi ed time on only one project, such as work on the construction of a
building. A progress report covers in detail all achievements as well as plans
for the upcoming reporting period toward completing one project.
Anyone in an organization may need to report progress made on a project.
Readers may use information in a progress report to make decisions, to
take actions, or to fi le for future reference. Figure 8.5 shows a progress
report.
To write a progress report:
1. Organize a progress report to answer the readers’ most important
questions fi rst. Use the following outline to plan for progress reports.
Under each heading, the writer may add subheadings if several ideas
will be covered in that section.
HEADING IN REPORT
WHAT THAT SECTION COVERS
Introduction
Report topic, purpose, and reporting period
Work Completed
What has been done
Work Scheduled
What needs to be done
Problems/Projections
What has gone wrong and when the work will be
finished
2. In the opening or introductory section of the progress report,
Name the project.
◾
Indicate the
◾
reporting period, which is the time the report covers.
State the purpose of the report (to tell readers the status of the project).
◾
3. Use I or we—fi rst person—where appropriate. You take responsibility for
your actions and opinions by using I. Using I or we is not only acceptable,
but also encouraged.
4. In the Work Completed section,
Note again the time period you cover. (This is optional; if it
◾
is included, it usually appears beside the heading or in the
opening sentence of the section.)
Use past tense verbs.
◾
Use subheadings (to separate tasks) or bulleted lists. When
◾
three or more tasks or topics are included in this section,
subheadings are necessary. When only one or two tasks are
included, subheadings are optional.
Think about the grade reports
you receive from school.
What is the writer’s purpose
in presenting this report?
Determine the relationship
between the writer and the
audience. Now think about
how grade reports changed
as you progressed through
your academic career from
elementary to middle school to
your current level of schooling.
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
Anyone inside or outside the writer’s orga-
nization needing information on progress
toward completion of a task.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Clearly describing achievements and plans
toward completing a task in a standard
organizational plan.
Informative Reports | 199
Figure 8.5 Internal Progress Report
Indicates that this is the
third progress report on this
project; notes the report
topic
Describes the project being
reported on, gives the
reporting period, and states
the purpose of the report
Covers what has been done
on the project; includes the
reporting period
Covers work yet to be done
Includes subheadings if
the work accomplished
falls under two or more
categories
Explains any difficulties that
may affect the project; gives
a revised completion date if
problems have caused delay
200 | Chapter 8
Provide suffi cient details and explanations about each
◾
job completed. Because your reader is probably most
concerned about what you have done on the project,
ensure that this section is clear and accurate. Place your
most important ideas fi rst. After all, this is your opportunity
to tell what you have achieved.
5. In the Work Scheduled section,
Tell your audience what work needs to be done in the next
◾
reporting period.
Use future tense verbs.
◾
Separate and emphasize each major task or job with
◾
subheadings, as you did in the Work Completed section.
Remember to use subheadings when you have three or
more tasks. Otherwise, subheadings are optional.
6. In the Problems section,
Describe any obstacles to completing the job. Inform the
◾
reader of anything that has affected the quality or quantity
of work.
Either list and number or describe these problems in
◾
paragraphs.
Be honest and direct.
◾
Report just the facts unless you need to assign responsibility
◾
for problems. Remember that finger-pointing can be
counterproductive.
7. In the Projections section, give readers a new completion date if problems
have stalled the project so that the original date cannot be met.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) publishes a website that contains
links to press releases of the past
decade. You will ﬁ nd everything from
food and drug research to biologics and
radiation protection.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 8.
Find a news release that interests you
and print it. Write several paragraphs to
explain if and how it uses the guidelines
for eﬀ ective news releases.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
James Berry, a pediatric occupational therapist, is tempted to give a parent a
glowing report even though the 3-year-old patient is not making significant
improvement in therapy sessions. Mr. Berry likes the parent and does not
want to add to the parent’s stress.
Think Critically
What are possible effects of misinformation in Mr. Berry’s reports?
Communication
Dilemma
STOP AND THINK
While both periodic and progress reports are issued periodically or in set
increments of time, what is the difference between the two reports?
Informative Reports | 201
NEWS RELEASES
News releases, also called press releases, are reports of events or
facts prepared for the media, which are systems or means of mass
communication. The goal of the release is to inform the public of, for
example, an employee promotion or a company expansion.
One type of press release is the public service announcement (PSA). PSAs
differ from other news releases in that they present facts benefi cial to the
public. PSAs, for example, announce Red Cross blood drives, city council
meetings, fund-raisers, and other public events. People and organizations
send news releases to the media to share information with the public.
In many large organizations, public relations, the communication between a
company and the outside world, is handled by departments that write news
releases to help the company maintain a positive image. For instance, if a
company executive is involved in a scandal, the public relations staff may prepare
a news release to present the company’s view and restore public confi dence.
In smaller organizations without public relations departments, any employee
may write a news release. The maintenance director might write a release
describing the company’s recycling efforts, a retail manager might cover the
store’s planned expansion, and a volunteer group’s administrative assistant
might outline the organization’s upcoming fund-raising project.
Because the writer sends the release to select news agencies, the fi rst readers
are editors and news directors. They decide whether the news release will
run. If the information is newsworthy and the release is well written so that
little editing is required, the chance that it will be published increases. Other
infl uential factors include space and time constraints.
If the release is published, the second audience is the public. The public is anyone
who reads a newspaper or magazine, watches television, uses the Internet, or
listens to the radio. Specialized media agencies receive news releases targeting a
particular audience, so the second audience might also be a select group.
For instance, you are probably familiar with television stations that target
specifi c people: MTV targets music lovers; TNN attracts country music
fans; CNN focuses on people interested in world, economic,
and political news; and the Disney Channel targets children.
Audiences are looking for the same thing—timely and interesting
information.
On the next page, Figure 8.6 shows a news release with a
triangle indicating the part of the release an editor chose to
publish. The last two paragraphs, which contained the least
important information, were cut.
To write a news release,
1. Begin by analyzing the audience. Consider the editor or news
director as well as the public.
2. Answer the classic Reporter’s Questions: Who? What? When?
Where? Why? and How? With answers to those questions, you
have the most important information to include in the news
release.
Recall news relating to
business or industry you
have seen, heard, or read
in the last week from
television, radio, print, or
online media. With that
news in mind, answer the
following questions: What
parts of the story do you
remember? What made the
story memorable? What
elements of the story do you
think business or industry
provided? What elements
were probably the result of a
reporter’s investigation?
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
Any person who appreciates news.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Planning and writing a news release that is
eﬀ ective enough in content, style, organization,
and format to win the news editor’s approval
for publication and that is interesting enough
to gain the attention of the ultimate audience;
organizing so that essential information comes
ﬁ rst and is not lost if the editor must cut the
story because of space or time constraints.
202 | Chapter 8
Figure 8.7 shows an illustration of this idea-packed opening for a news
release. Notice where the Reporter’s Questions are addressed.
3. Beyond the Reporter’s Questions, ask yourself these questions: (a) What
will interest my audience? (b) What will grab their attention? (c) What
would they ask if they could?
4. Plan for accuracy. Check your prewriting notes for accuracy in the
following:
Facts
◾
Numbers and statistics
◾
Figure 8.6 Model News Release Cut by Editor
Complete the Reorganizing
an Ineﬀ ective News Release
worksheet available at www.
cengage.com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link
for Chapter 8; then click
Data Files.
Informative Reports | 203
Names
◾
Locations
◾
Quotations
◾
Completeness (“the whole truth”)
◾
With correct text, releases will have a greater chance of being
published.
5. Plan for credibility. Exaggerations are overstatements or additions
beyond the truth that can ruin a person’s credibility. Instead, use
information that can be verifi ed. Avoid superlatives such as the best,
the fastest, and the worst unless you can document or prove the
statement. If your release opens with “R. J. Birch, the fastest 10K
runner in the state,” make sure you have her race times or other
proof of your statement.
6. Compose the headline carefully because it will be read fi rst. Include an
active verb. Use present tense for current events, past tense for events
already concluded, and future tense for scheduled activities. For example,
the headline HALIFAX ACADEMY TO HOST STAR TREK CONVENTION
uses an active verb that indicates future time (to host) because the event
has not yet occurred. Be aware that your news release will compete with
others for space or airtime (time to deliver a news story). Thus, the
headline is your chance to make a positive fi rst impression on the
reader.
7. Open the body of the release with a hook—catchy wording or an idea
that attracts attention. Dynamic wording or an intriguing idea seizes the
audience’s attention. Below are hooks used to open news releases.
The nets are still hanging in Memorial Coliseum after last night’s City
◾
League upset, but only because the Knights expect to return for them
during the playoffs.
When 600 fi rst-year students show up for orientation at Schantz
◾
College on Saturday, they will receive something besides their dorm
assignments.
The Easter Bunny Brought What?
◾
Those opening sentences attract attention so readers or listeners will want
to know more.
Lakeside High’s 6’7” senior Reggie Watson ended a year of suspense for
recruiters from a number of big-name schools Tuesday, March 15, 20—,
when he signed a letter of intent with his father’s alma mater, Notre Dame,
here in his family’s Watauga home.
Figure 8.7 Reporter’s Questions in News Release Opening
When?
What? Why? How?
Where?
Who?
204 | Chapter 8
8. Order ideas from most important to least important and begin with the
important answers to the Reporter’s Questions. Organizing from most to
least important achieves several purposes:
You make editors’ work easier and the story’s publication more likely.
◾
You help readers fi nd the most important information quickly and
◾
easily—even if they do not read the entire article.
Making cuts is easier, and you have more control of how they are
◾
made.
If a news director has 20 seconds of airtime and your news release is
30 seconds, the news director must cut 10 seconds or choose not to use it.
Likewise, print editors sometimes must cut inches to fi t releases into the
space available.
9. Format news releases so information the reader needs stands out, editors
can make changes easily, and news anchors (who might read the text
on the air) can easily follow the document. For illustrative purposes, the
release is divided into three units: the top of the page or introductory
information, the body or story, and pagination cues. Refer to Figure 8.8.
10. Properly format introductory information. Many large companies
create letterhead for news releases. It is printed with the company name,
postal and web addresses, telephone number, logo, and the words NEWS
RELEASE. If your organization does not have special letterhead, use
plain 8 1⁄2" 3 11" paper. Use the following guidelines for introductory
format:
Begin with the words
◾
NEWS RELEASE in all capital letters. Key the
source of the document in initial caps if letterhead is not used.
©Zoriah/The Image Works
Informative Reports | 205
Key
◾
Contact and a colon fl ush right across from NEWS RELEASE. After
the colon, enter the name of the person responsible for the release as
well as the person’s job title and phone number.
Record the date the document was written beneath
◾
NEWS RELEASE.
Use
◾
For Immediate Release or place Release Date and a colon at the
left margin under the date. After the colon, key the date and the
specifi c time the information should be made public.
Writers occasionally request a release to be held for a period of
◾
time before publication. If you want a story to be held, beneath or
Figure 8.8 News Release Format
206 | Chapter 8
STOP AND THINK
Before a news release is published, what reader or readers must approve it?
Isaac Nonn is a campaign worker for a candidate running for the state
legislature. Isaac’s candidate is slipping in the polls, and the opposition is
gaining in popularity. Isaac recently received a packet in the mail from an
anonymous sender, indicating that the opposition candidate was expelled
from college for cheating before she transferred to the university from
which she ultimately graduated. Isaac is thinking about forwarding the
materials to local media outlets—perhaps anonymously.
Think Critically
How should Isaac handle the situation?
Focus on
Ethics
beside the release date, key Please hold until [desired release time] or
Please embargo story until [desired release time]. Embargo means “to
withhold or delay publication.”
Give the news agency a suggested headline in all capital letters.
◾
11. To format the body of a release, preface it with a dateline, which
identifi es the location of the story. Key the dateline in all capital
letters. In Figure 8.8, NEWTOWN, AZ is where the story takes place.
After the location, (a) leave a space, (b) key a dash, and (c) leave
another space.
12. Use pagination cues, a special code to help readers follow the text and
read from one page to another. To use these cues,
Key the word
◾
-more- centered at the bottom of the page when the
release will be continued on the next page.
End news releases with
◾
-30- or ### centered after the last line.
Do not promote a product or a service in your release. If you are tempted
to do so, remind yourself that news is who did what, where, when, why,
and how, while advertisements are how new, improved, or cost-effective
something might be. Editors rarely publish releases that read like sales
literature.
Informative Reports | 207
Chapter 8
Review
SUMMARY
1. Summaries and abstracts are condensed versions of longer
documents. In a summary, the writer clearly and logically presents
only main ideas. The length of the original and the writer’s purpose
determine the length. Abstracts are shorter than summaries and cover
the main idea of the original.
2. A mechanism description describes the main parts of a device or
mechanism and explains the purpose of the mechanism and overall
design, the various parts, they way they look, and their functions.
3. Periodic reports describe the progress of all ongoing projects in an
organization or organization division during a specifi ed time period.
4. Progress reports describe the status of one project for a specifi ed period.
Progress and periodic reports require writers to consider the interests of
the audience and the schedule of the project or the organization.
5. News or press releases are reports of events or facts prepared by
employees to send to the media. The goal of the release is to have the
media outlets publish the story and inform the public.
Checklist
Have I designed, organized, and written the document with the audience
◾
in mind?
Have I analyzed my audience(s) and determined what readers need?
◾
Is my format appropriate for the audience and the situation?
◾
Have I included relevant background information?
◾
Have I used a logical and appropriate organizational plan?
◾
Are the ideas under each heading organized appropriately?
◾
Is the information complete and accurate?
◾
Have I used lists where appropriate for ease of reading?
◾
Have I made my document easy to read by using descriptive headings? Do
◾
the headings follow parallel structure?
Do I present accurate, specifi c details?
◾
Have I remained objective throughout the document?
◾
Have I presented problems as facts, not accusations?
◾
208 | Chapter 8
Build Your Foundation
1. Write a one-sentence summary of one of the following well-known
fairy tales: “Little Red Riding Hood,” “Cinderella,” “Sleeping Beauty,”
“Goldilocks and the Three Bears,” or “The Three Little Pigs.” Compare
your summary with those of your classmates. If you read the story rather
than working from memory, remember to use your own words.
2. The statements listed in items a–j will go into a progress report. Identify
each statement as Work Completed, Work Scheduled, or Problems/
Projections.
a. We have purchased a site license from NetBright for our network.
b. The CD-ROM, which was delivered last Friday, was damaged in
shipping so that it is inoperable.
c. We installed screen savers on all computers.
d. If all work scheduled is completed as we expect, the network will be
ready for the team orientation on September 23.
e. This week the system director will order the serial cable we need.
f. The hardware security system we requested was $300 over budget.
g. Each computer will be named so that users can easily identify it.
h. A system administrator must be trained before we can operate fully.
i. We connected the laser printer to the network and tested it.
j. We forgot to order a surge protector for the computer attached to the
LCD projection panel, so we cannot use this equipment until the order
arrives next week.
3. Some of the following sentences are vague, and some include the
writer’s opinions. Revise each sentence to make it specifi c and factual.
Invent details as needed.
a. The calibrator is several minutes off schedule.
b. The phenomenal response to our new computer safety education
program shows that this new program will benefi t employees.
c. To get to the warehouse, go down the hall a bit and turn left.
d. The line was down for a while last Friday because of a lecture on safety.
e. We can assemble the original air purifi er in 45 minutes, but the fancy
case of the new model results in a much longer assembly time than
we planned.
4. Evaluate your progress on a hobby or collection. For instance, if you build
sound systems, explain the pieces of equipment (for example, speakers
and receivers) you have acquired and describe the equipment you will
add. If you collect baseball cards or comic books, note the cards or books
you own now and the items you want to trade or buy. Make notes about
your progress. Then share those notes with your classmates.
Your Turn
5. Write a long summary, a short summary, and an abstract on one of the
following: a magazine or journal article, a textbook chapter, a sporting
event, a meeting, a TV show, a movie, a classroom lecture, or a speech. The
material you use for the summaries and abstract might relate to your chosen
career fi eld, a recent news event, or a topic suggested by your instructor.
You can ﬁ nd these fairy tales
at www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 8; then click
Web Links.
Informative Reports | 209
6. List fi ve mechanisms you know well. These may be mechanisms you use
at work, at home, or at school. Consider using simple devices or a single
mechanism within a larger, more complex machine. Write a mechanism
description for one of the items. In your report, include a diagram of the
mechanism.
7. Write a periodic report using the following information.
As the Drafting Club chair, you receive organization funds from the Student
Government Association (SGA). You report to the SGA twice a semester to tell
them what the club is doing. Your next report is due January 6, 20—. In this
report, you will discuss Professional Pursuits, Service, and Membership. The club
is more active than ever. Over the holidays, five members attended the American
Institute of Building Design meeting in Pensacola and brought back information
to share with other members. The club began the school year with 21 members,
and two students joined during the second semester. This year’s service project is
to plan the city’s first Habitat for Humanity house. Club members have completed
the exterior drawings and submitted them for approval. They will finish the
interior drawings before the school year ends. All 23 members of the club have
participated in this service project.
8. Think of groups to which you belong: a family, a club, a neighborhood,
a school. With one group and a particular time period in mind, plan
and write a periodic report for a specifi c audience. Describe the ongoing
activities for your group or for your unit of the larger organization.
9. Consider any project you are working on at home, school, or work as a
topic for a progress report. Your audience will be a person or group of
people who have an interest in or make decisions about the project. Use
the appropriate format and organization for the topic and audience.
10. If you are seeking a summer or part-time job, applying for admission
to a school, or working on a project, write a progress report to the
appropriate person about how you are accomplishing your goals.
11. Contact several businesses or governmental agencies to request a copy of
the organization’s annual report, a periodic report outlining the status of
the organization that is presented annually to shareholders, employees,
vendors, and others. Analyze these reports to determine whether they fi t
the guidelines for periodic reports in this chapter.
Community Connection
12. Visit a nonprofi t organization in your area. Learn about the mission and
needs of the organization. Then locate a journal or newspaper article
that is relevant to the nonprofi t—an article you think might help with
the organization’s mission or goals. Write a one- to three-paragraph
summary of the article. After submitting the article and your summary to
your instructor for review, present the article and your revised and edited
summary to the nonprofi t’s personnel.
13. Write a news release for your school or another organization with which
you are affi liated to announce an upcoming event, an accomplishment,
or other newsworthy information. Submit the release to your instructor
and class. If appropriate after careful revision and editing, submit it to a
local news agency for publication.
210 | Chapter 9
Investigative Reports
WRITE TO LEARN
Consider an investigation you made recently. Perhaps you had a problem
with a piece of equipment and had to investigate what caused the problem.
Or maybe you attended a workshop, a seminar, or an off-campus lecture or
looked for a new apartment and needed to tell others what you learned. Or
perhaps you tried a new recipe for your family or took part in a clinical trial.
Think about your impressions of what is required to effectively report on an
investigation. Write a paragraph describing the audience that needs to learn
about this situation. List three to fi ve pieces or types of information your
audience may need. Write your impression of how your audience will use
the information.
Chapter
Focus on Investigative Reports
Read the sample incident report on the next page and answer these
questions:
When did the incident occur?
•
Where is the date of the incident mentioned?
•
What is the main idea? In other words, what was the incident?
•
What kind of information is contained in the Outcomes section?
•
What If?
The information was intended for only one reader—an administrator at
•
the hospital?
The person who improperly installed the probe was not known?
•
Goals
Develop a trip report that meets the needs
◾
of the audience
Compose an effective incident report
◾
Compose science reports
◾
Compose forensic reports
◾
Terms
conclusion, p. 218
◾
deductive reasoning, p. 217
◾
forensic reports, p. 221
◾
incident reports, p. 213
◾
inductive reasoning, p. 217
◾
objectivity, p. 218
◾
passive voice, p. 218
◾
result, p. 218
◾
scientific method, p. 217
◾
trip reports, p. 215
◾
Investigative Reports | 211
Sample Incident Report
Sample Incident Report
Writing@Work
Anna
Linnenberger
works for a
small Colorado-
based optics
research company called Boulder Nonlinear Systems (BNS).
BNS builds spatial light modulators, which are essentially
programmable lenses that can be used, for example, for
satellite laser communications, data encryption, and optical
tweezers for biological research.
At BNS, Anna is responsible for developing software,
overseeing customer support, testing new products, writing
proposals and reports, and running funded projects that are
under way. According to Anna, “Writing skills are surprisingly underemphasized
in engineering classes. Although I have a BS in computer engineering and
am working toward a doctorate in electrical engineering, I learned most of my
writing skills on the job from senior engineers.”
Even with expert help, Anna finds proposals difficult to write well: “Not only
are you often writing about a subtopic that you are not an expert on, but your
audience is a proposal reviewer who probably isn’t an expert either. So it can be
challenging to propose an idea persuasively and clearly to your target audience.”
For Anna, reporting on research projects that are under way is much easier
than writing proposals. “Each research project requires progress reports and
final reports that are written according to a predefined formula or outline. You
are writing to the funding agency’s technical point person for your project.
They basically want to know that their money is being spent to develop the
technology you proposed and that things are moving forward at a reasonable
pace.”
The writing style for Anna’s engineering reports is minimalist: “Write clearly
and get to the point quickly. You don’t want to be wordy, and you never use
first-person point of view such as ‘I did this’ or ‘we did that.’ All technical terms
need to be defined the first time you use them.” Anna hopes that her reports
and proposals are used to “further optics research in new directions.”
Think Critically
1. Go to BNS’s website. Has the company explained its mission so that a
nontechnical person can understand it? Does BNS need to explain its
mission? Why or why not?
2. Why do you think writing skills are underemphasized in engineering
classes? Do you think most engineers write as much as Anna does? Explain.
Printed with permission of Anna Linnenberger
Courtesy of Anna Linnenberger
212 | Chapter 9
Investigative Reports | 213
INCIDENT REPORT
Incident reports, also called accident reports, describe an unusual incident
or occurrence. The incident could be an accident, a surprise inspection, the
outburst of an angry employee or customer, or a near-accident. When police
write the details of a fender bender, they are writing an incident report.
When an instructor “writes up” a student for missing class, he or she is
writing an incident report.
The report must be carefully written to refl ect what really happened, for
it can become legal evidence used in court. It also must be written to
accommodate the needs of a variety of readers. These readers may be heads
of companies, managers, oversight organizations such as the FDA, insurance
companies, and criminal justice personnel. Incident reports are used by
many professionals. Anyone who is responsible for overseeing the safety of
personnel, the public, operations, and equipment; for preventing accidents;
or for dealing with the aftermath of accidents might read an incident report.
Incident reports communicate a precise description of what happened and
provide a fi le for later reference. They also are written to help employees and
organizations see what is occurring so they can formulate plans to prevent
the incident from occurring again.
Figure 9.1 on the next page recounts an incident at a food production plant.
The most likely readers are supervisors, managers, company heads, and
food safety inspectors. Other possible readers are consumer groups, news
agencies, representatives of insurance companies, criminal proceedings
personnel, and union representatives. Because of the potential for many
different readers and some distant from the writer, the report is formal,
using an appropriate manuscript format.
To write an incident report:
1. Begin with a brief summary of what happened.
2. Add Background as a heading if information about events leading up
to the incident would be helpful to your readers. Some incident reports
combine the summary and background and do not use a separate heading
for this part if it is short.
3. Under Description, tell exactly what happened in chronological order. Make
sure you cover the Reporter’s Questions: Who? What? When?
Where? Why? and How?
4. Be honest and objective.
5. Use the Outcome section to provide the observable incident
results.
6. Use the Conclusion section to tell what was learned from the
incident and how to prevent it from happening again.
To get started, carefully note any evidence. Interview people
separately who witnessed or who know about the incident. Do
not include information you cannot verify.
Imagine a familiar scene:
Children are playing together
when something is broken.
When an adult arrives, he or
she asks, “What happened?”
What responses do the
children provide? Will all
of the children give the
same account? Will some
responses be more useful to
the questioner than others?
If so, how and why? Describe
similar situations from your
work or academic life.
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
Anyone who is responsible for safety or who
must handle a situation after an accident or
incident.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Writing precise, detailed, and objective infor-
mation that answers the audience’s questions
and is organized to be easily read and used.
214 | Chapter 9
STOP AND THINK
The Reporter’s Questions should be answered in the Description section of an
incident report. What are the questions?
Figure 9.1 Example of Incident Report
Summarizes what happened
Provides a more detailed
narrative of the incident;
covers the incident from
beginning to end; answers
the major questions Who?
What? When? Where? Why?
and How?
Tells what happened as a
result of the incident; may
repeat some information
stated in the Description
Explains what has been
learned as a result of this
experience and what will help
prevent a similar incident
Investigative Reports | 215
To see a longer version of the
trip report shown on the next
page, go to www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link for
Chapter 9; then click Sample
Documents.
TRIP REPORT
Trip reports tell supervisors and coworkers what was gained from a business
trip. Trip reports are a condensed narrative. Often the report does not include
everything about the trip, only those parts that are most useful to the
organization. In this way, the trip report is similar to a summary because the
writer includes only the essential details about the trip.
Businesses often send workers to conferences to learn the latest developments
in their fi eld. Sometimes associates visit other businesses to negotiate deals
or to learn about operations. A trip is an investigation, a research mission
from which the fi ndings must be shared with others. Typically, trip reports
provide managers with critical information resulting from a trip. In addition,
coworkers may use information from trip reports to do their jobs.
Figure 9.2 on the next page is a trip report from Lily Lang detailing her
fi ndings from a business trip to China. While in China, she met with current
and potential vendors for her company—a manufacturer and a wholesaler of
hammocks, rugs, and other household and outdoor furnishings.
To write a trip report:
1. Report information your audience will fi nd most useful. You
do not need to include all of the details of the trip, only what
your audience requires.
2. Preview the report in your introduction.
3. Cover the Reporter’s Questions as you write the report: Who?
What? When? Where? Why? and How? Write a section for
each major concept or activity to be reported.
4. Include a heading for each section (major concept or activity)
in the report body.
5. Use bulleted lists for important events or knowledge gained.
6. Decide whether your report needs Conclusions and/or
Recommendations sections. Some trip reports require both,
others neither, and some only one.
Use Conclusions to summarize the trip benefi ts or fi ndings.
◾
Use Recommendations to suggest further action(s).
◾
7. Choose chronological order or order of importance.
8. Use active voice and fi rst person—I or we—to make the report sound
natural.
Do not try to retell every element of a trip. In addition, do not include
information that has no relevance to your audience, such as the chance
meeting of a childhood friend or the fabulous Indian restaurant you
discovered.
Prepare for writing a trip report before you leave. Find out what the purpose
of the trip is and what your organization expects you to learn. Investigate
these concerns during your trip and address them in the report.
Suppose you are planning
a vacation to a place from
which someone you know
just returned. What questions
would you ask that person?
Do you think that person’s
experience might enhance
your trip in some way? If so,
how?
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
Managers and administrators (and some-
times coworkers and clients/customers) who
need information acquired during a trip to
make decisions and plans.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Creating clear, well-organized, and focused
information and constantly considering the
audience’s needs and roles.
216 | Chapter 9
STOP AND THINK
How do writers decide what to cover in a trip report?
Figure 9.2 Example of Trip Report
Previews the rest of the
report
Suggests what should be done
with the information gained
from the trip
Sums up Lang’s assessment
of the trip
Investigative Reports | 217
SCIENCE LAB REPORTS
The best science is born of a curiosity about the world along with the
creative thinking to fi gure things out. Scientifi c fi ndings, however, add little
to people’s collective knowledge unless someone records what was done and
what happened in a science report. In the classroom, lab reports become the
vehicles for testing knowledge of concepts and procedures. In professional
disciplines, lab reports become the basis of science articles submitted to
major journals such as Analytical Chemistry and Journal of Forensic Sciences.
The steps of the scientifi c method dictate the structure of science reports.
The scientifi c method uses both inductive and deductive reasoning.
Reasoning from a particular observation (I sneeze every time I am around a
rose) to a general conclusion (Therefore, I think roses make me sneeze) is
called inductive reasoning. Reasoning from a general conclusion (I think
roses make me sneeze) to a particular situation (I probably won’t sneeze if
I give my mother candy instead of roses) is called deductive reasoning. Using
inductive reasoning, scientists arrive at a tentative hypothesis, then use
deductive reasoning to test that hypothesis for validity. The science report is
the written record of this process.
While some differences exist in the structure of a science report among
various disciplines—names for a heading or the addition of a section—a
science report always answers these questions: What was the purpose of the
lab? What materials were used? What procedure was followed? What were
the results? What were the conclusions?
Organize
As you review the notes taken during your experiment or procedure,
organize your information into these sections:
Introduction:
◾
Tells the purpose or the objective of the lab (what the lab is
expected to prove) and can provide background of the situation
under investigation, tells under whose authority the lab was
conducted, and provides relevant dates. The introduction does
not always have a separate heading in shorter reports.
Materials and Method
◾
(also called Experimental Section,
Methodology, or Procedures): Lists materials, items, evidence,
and/or instruments used. This section describes the procedure
and includes relevant calculations. Materials can be presented
in a separate heading from Methodology if the report is long.
Results and Discussion
◾
(or just Results): Presents test results
with relevant calculations, including any accompanying graphics
such as tables or graphs. This section presents the results and
explains why things happened. Results can be presented in a
separate heading from Discussion if the report is long.
Conclusion(s):
◾
Includes a brief summary that tells how the
test results, fi ndings, and analyses meet the objectives of the
lab. This section tells what was learned or gained from the
experiment.
How do your science classes
diﬀ er from your other
classes (such as English,
history, business, or physical
education)? Explain why you
think these diﬀ erences exist.
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
• A scientist or professional interested in
learning and critiquing the latest research
in the ﬁ eld.
• An educator testing students’ knowledge of
a concept or process.
Both readers respect, understand, and follow
the scientiﬁ c method.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Setting up sound research design, record-
ing results methodically, analyzing data, and
drawing logical conclusions. Presenting
research objectively, following the principles
of the scientiﬁ c method.
218 | Chapter 9
Write
After organizing your data, you are ready to write. In most
cases, you will be writing to an expert in the fi eld. (An exception
is forensics, which may require explanations for the lay reader
too.) So you will most likely use the scientifi c jargon of the fi eld.
When writing, remember to:
1. Use precision when describing procedures or offering
numerical calculations.
✓ Precise
The tadpole measured
3.15 cm long.
✗ Approximate
The tadpole measured about
3 cm long.
2. Use passive voice (the verb to be + the past participle of
the verb) when describing the methodology or procedures.
Passive voice focuses on the process and keeps the report
objective.
✓ Passive Voice
Tiny shifts in blood fl ow
to parts of the brain were
detected with functional
MRI.
✗ Active Voice
Using functional MRI, we
detected tiny shifts in blood
fl ow to parts of the brain.
3. Maintain objectivity by describing observable results without letting
personal bias or emotions infl uence your observations.
✓ Objectivity
The client fi dgeted, her eyes darted
around the room, and she pursed
her lips tightly.
✗ Personal Bias or Emotions
The client was clearly angry.
4. Separate observable results (the facts) in the Results section from
conclusions drawn (what the facts mean) in the Conclusions section.
A result is not the same as a conclusion. A result is simply what
happened. A conclusion goes beyond what happened and requires the
researcher to draw an inference and interpret the data.
✓ Results
The patient’s temperature remained
stable, ranging from 97.5° to 98.1°
over the last 48 hours.
✗ Conclusion
The patient is no longer
contagious.
5. Document any sources that were used and provide a list of references.
6. When required by the discipline and length of the lab, consider adding:
A
◾
Theory section if the lab relies on extensive theory.
A
◾
n Instrumentation section if the lab tests equipment.
A
◾
Calculations section if the lab uses lengthy mathematical computations.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
New technologies have made modern
scientiﬁ c research possible. The
developments of advanced instrumentation
and experimental techniques have provided
researchers the means to collect many forms
of qualitative and quantitative data. Computer
programs such as molecular modeling
programs, Ab Initio quantum chemistry
software, Mathcad, and Maple help process
and analyze huge amounts of data.
Think Critically
Research one of these programs and explain
how this program helps researchers make
new discoveries in science.
Complete the Active/ Passive
Editing Exercise worksheet
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 9;
then click Data Files.
Investigative Reports | 219
A
◾
Recommendation section if future research is warranted.
A
◾
n Appendix (a separate section at the end of the report)
if complex data such as tables and graphs would otherwise
disrupt the fl ow of the report.
7. Use the straightforward language of the science report.
To
◾
Verb+What Phrases: To determine the differences
between several aquatic ecosystems, samples were taken in
November from three sites in Georgia.
Lists:
◾
A survey was sent to 150 students, 25 instructors,
and 50 parents.
Description of Processes:
◾
The blood was drawn from the
patient’s fi nger and placed on the slide. The sample was
examined under a microscope.
Cause-to-Effect Reasoning:
◾
The data from the table
suggests that the resolution is highest with the pH 7/45%
meOH buffer solution (alpha=3.35).
Do not include results in the Conclusions section or conclusions in the
Results section. Do not allow your personal bias to infl uence the conclusions
you draw. Finally, do not leave out any relevant data. Record results exactly
as they happen. On the next page, Figure 9.3 shows a science lab report.
The FDA publishes a website that
contains links to press releases of the
past decade. You will ﬁ nd everything
from food and drug research to biologics
and radiation protection.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 9.
What key topics are in the FDA’s news?
What news is in the spotlight? Read
one article and share ﬁ ve facts from the
article with your classmates.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Clinical trials are research studies that test the effectiveness of new drugs,
vaccines, and medical procedures. Many of these trials are funded by private
companies. Usually, these companies want to sell the medicines related to
the study.
Changing or “fudging” data can be tempting for funding organizations when
results of a lab experiment are unexpected or difficult to understand. Ideally,
clinical trials and tests from several sources would show similar results. If
that is the case, the results are considered to be true, or valid. Sometimes,
though, studies show conflicting results.
Jacob Krishner is the president of AM Pharmaceuticals. His company
sponsored a clinical trial for a vaccine to protect against malaria. Three
other trials had already indicated the effectiveness of the vaccine. The most
recent study, done on a relatively small sample and conducted by his newest
research scientist, shows that the drug might have a serious side effect. The
company has sunk a great deal of money into this project, and company
profits are down.
Think Critically
What should Jacob do? Does he accept the latest test results? Does he
manufacture the vaccine based on the other three studies? What should he
consider as he makes his decision?
Focus on
Ethics
220 | Chapter 9
STOP AND THINK
What is the difference between results and conclusions? Why do writers of science
lab reports use passive voice?
Figure 9.3 Science Lab Report
Purpose of the lab
Materials list
Results focusing on observable
data
Application of knowledge and
reasoning to the evidence
Conclusion based on the
evidence and reasoning
UNDERCUT
TRAPPED SLAG
ROOT SURFACE CRACK
Description of method
focusing on the process
Investigative Reports | 221
FORENSIC REPORTS
Forensic reports are investigative reports that analyze evidence for legal
purposes. From the Latin forensic (“of the forum,” or “public”), forensics
is the branch of science that uses scientifi c principles and methodology
to evaluate various kinds of evidence. Forensic science includes a variety
of specialties, including the study of handwriting, fi ngerprinting, blood,
ballistics, tire treads, and computer hard drives. While television shows
such as NCIS have made forensic work in a crime lab popular, noncriminal
investigations use forensic science as well. Highly trained in their respective
fi elds, forensic experts write reports and often testify in legal proceedings.
As a specialized type of science lab, forensic reports strictly adhere to
the scientifi c method—similar to the science lab reports discussed in the
preceding section. Attention to detail, reliance on test procedures, objective
analysis, documented research, careful reporting, and observations based
on evidence are all important. Ethical considerations are vital
as the forensic specialist strives to present evidence without
making unnecessary assumptions or unproven interpretations.
The facts must speak for themselves. On the following page,
Figure 9.4 shows a forensic report.
To write a forensic report:
1. Identify the credentials of the expert (name, title, education,
and sometimes years of experience). This information can be
included at the beginning or end of a report. As part of court
testimony, the credentials are subject to careful scrutiny by
the prosecuting and defense attorneys.
2. Identify the specimens under investigation, usually by
number. These specimens may become exhibits in a case.
How do you make judgments
about people and events?
Do you base your opinions
on evidence, intuition, or a
combination of both? Explain.
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
A member of a legal proceeding who must
make a decision, decide the fate of a defen-
dant, discover the truth, or make critical deci-
sions based on the best evidence available.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Investigating objectively and thoroughly, pre-
senting expert opinion clearly, and explaining
complex processes to people not familiar
with the ﬁ eld.
© Edw 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
222 | Chapter 9
Figure 9.4 Forensic Report
APA style used to cite
references in forensic science
Credentials of forensic
anthropologist
Evidence-based conclusions
Parenthetical documenta-
tion used throughout to cite
sources
Objective, precise
description of the evidence
Numbers used to identify
evidence; purpose of the
report
Table used to compile results
for easy reference
Investigative Reports | 223
3. Organize the report according to the principles of the basic forensic report,
as follows:
Evidence:
◾
A description of the evidence collected.
Method:
◾
A description of the method or procedure used to test the
evidence, using charts, graphs, photos, and/or diagrams as necessary.
Observation
◾
(sometimes called Interpretation, Results, or Conclusion):
The conclusions that can be reasonably drawn from the evidence. The
report also notes if the evidence is not conclusive or if evidence is
missing.
Akira Mehrs, the director of Spalding Photography Studio, must write an
incident report about an altercation that occurred between an employee
whom she respects a great deal and a customer. Darrell French, a
photography aide, was accepting payment from Dawn Morton for a packet
of her daughter’s portraits. When Ms. Morton’s credit card was declined,
she became agitated, demanding that Mr. French run the card again and
exclaiming that he must be doing something wrong. Mr. French walked
away, leaving Ms. Mehrs to handle the situation. When Ms. Mehrs sits down
to write the incident report, she considers omitting the fact that Mr. French
walked away from his station because she realizes that that fact will detract
from his service record.
Think Critically
Should Ms. Mehrs omit details from the report to protect her employee? Why or
why not?
Communication
Dilemma
© The Image Bank/Getty Images
224 | Chapter 9
4. Write descriptions, discussion, and observations using the basic
principles of scientifi c and technical communication: Use specifi c and
precise measurements and vocabulary. Remain objective and focus on the
process and the data.
5. Use strategies for communicating unfamiliar information to a lay audience.
Explain terms as you write, provide quick defi nitions (in parentheses or in
the next sentence), explain scientifi c concepts using common analogies,
and break down complex processes step-by-step.
6. Provide headings and subheadings as necessary. For example, if you are
asked to determine the number, sex, age, and condition of a set of bones,
the report might include these headings: Number, Sex, Age, and Condition
of Remains.
7. Provide references as they are used. You can cite references with
parenthetical citations and a list of references at the end.
Do not allow prejudice or bias to infl uence your fi ndings. Rely on evidence,
not conjecture. Do not draw inferences if the evidence is incomplete. Simply
point out that the evidence is insuffi cient.
STOP AND THINK
Why is it important for forensic specialists to include their credentials in a forensic
report?
Investigative Reports | 225
Chapter 9
Review
Checklist
Have I analyzed my audience(s) and determined what readers need to
◾
know?
Have I designed, organized, and written the document with the audience
◾
in mind?
Is my format appropriate for the audience and the situation?
◾
Have I included relevant background information?
◾
Are the data under each heading organized appropriately?
◾
Is the information complete and accurate?
◾
Have I presented problems as facts, not accusations?
◾
SUMMARY
1. Trip reports tell supervisors and coworkers what was gained from a
business trip. The report includes only those details of the trip that
are most helpful for the audience.
2. Incident reports, also called accident reports, describe an accident or
an unusual incident or occurrence.
3. Lab reports answer these questions: What was the purpose of the lab?
What materials were used? What was the procedure? What were the
results? What are the conclusions?
4. Forensic reports give the credentials of the examiner, describe
evidence, describe the method used to examine the evidence, and
make observations.
226 | Chapter 9
Build Your Foundation
1. Are these statements subjective or objective? Explain.
a. This is the best English class I have ever taken.
b. This class covers the basic style and formatting of technical writing.
c. The patient seemed angry, probably because of something that
happened on the way to the offi ce.
d. The temperature is in the mid-80s with little chance of rain.
2. Some of the sentences below are vague, and some include the writer’s
opinions. Revise each sentence to make it specifi c and factual. Invent
details as needed.
a. The calibrator is several minutes off schedule.
b. The phenomenal response to our new computer safety education
program shows that this new program will benefi t employees.
c. To get to the warehouse, go down the hall a bit and turn left.
d. The line was down for a while on Friday because of some lecture on
safety.
3. Are the statements listed below observable results? Respond yes or no.
a. The manager plans to review safety standards with all employees.
b. The olive trees have lost 80 percent of their leaves.
c. Mr. Domingues regrets his decision to close the recapping unit.
d. After the robbery, the Gallery Movie Theater closed.
e. The front line operator failed to read the Caution statement.
4. What type of graphics do these statements call for? Consider
calculations, fi gures, and tables.
a. The experiments were designed to demonstrate the properties of
inverse functions. We experimented with several types of functions,
including transcendental functions and polynomial expressions.
b. The area of the platinum disk was found using simple algebra.
c. An energy fl ow diagram (see Figure 2) was developed illustrating the
energy fl ow and the student’s position on the food web.
d. The circuit in Figure 3 uses an op-amp as a multiplier.
5. Which part of the following statements could be more precise?
a. The bear drank from the water hole several times in the afternoon.
b. The decibels were tested at levels too low for human ears.
c. The robin sat on a few eggs in its nest for a couple of weeks.
d. The CPU costs around $500, the monitor costs about $350, and the
printer costs $398.99 plus shipping and handling.
6. Where do these sentences belong in a lab report—under Introduction,
Materials and Method, Results, Discussion, or Conclusions?
a. For this activity, four potatoes, four pieces of wood, four cans, and a
fl ame were used to determine evidence of carbon.
b. The larger the food supply, the larger the guppy population.
c. The data for absorbencies in Table 1 show excellent correlation and a
strong linear relationship (R=1.00) for Plot 1.
Investigative Reports | 227
7. To practice explaining complex information to a lay audience, fi nd a way
to explain these laws of physics to a 6-year-old.
a. Conservation of Matter: Matter is neither created nor destroyed.
b. Third Law of Motion: For every action, there is an equal and opposite
reaction.
c. First Law of Motion: A body persists in its state of rest or of uniform
motion unless acted upon by an external unbalanced force.
8. Think of ways to explain these complex processes so that a lay reader
can easily understand the process. Look for a common occurrence or
description to use as an analogy:
a. How the subconscious affects a person’s behavior
b. How the human eye sees
c. How lightning is formed
Your Turn
9. Think of a time when something went wrong—perhaps a problem at
school or work. After identifying and analyzing your audience, write
an incident report describing the incident and what you learned.
10. Visit a place of interest—perhaps a college, a business, a museum, or a
sporting event. Think of questions to ask during your trip. Write a trip
report to a real or fi ctional supervisor, answering the questions.
11. Conduct a science experiment at home. Get ideas from books, a science
instructor, or online sources (Steve Spangler Science or ScienceBob).
Take notes and write a lab report for English class.
12. Think of something about which you would like to know more—when
your car gets better gas mileage or whether some brand of sunscreen
works better than another. Ask a science instructor to help you design
an experiment. Perform the experiment and write a lab report.
Community Connection
13. Volunteer at a daycare center, for a reading program, or for another
activity. Write an incident report based on an event you witnessed or
learned of. Address the report to the leader of the organization.
14. If you have a chance to travel to a conference, a seminar, a workshop, or
another event, provide a trip report to the sponsors of the trip. Ask your
classmates and/or instructor to help edit and revise the report.
15. Interview someone who performs experiments, conducts labs or medical
tests, or examines evidence (a police offi cer or a medical examiner, for
example). Ask how reports are written, how evidence is handled, and
how the scientifi c method is used. Discuss the diffi culty of remaining
objective. Share a short written or oral report with your class.
16. Attend a court proceeding for a criminal case and take notes. How do
forensic specialists provide expert testimony? Interview a lawyer and
ask about the importance of forensic testimony and the procedure
for admitting it into evidence. Tell your classmates how your fi ndings
compare with the chapter’s information about forensic reports.
228 | Chapter 10
Instructions
WRITE TO LEARN
Think of the last time you followed instructions. Maybe the instructions were
from an instructor, your parent or guardian, your employer, a textbook, or an
online help manual. In a short journal entry, answer these questions: Under
what circumstances did you read the instructions? Were the instructions
easy or diffi cult to follow? Explain. How did you handle any problems that
resulted from poorly written instructions? If graphics were included, what
kind were they? Were they helpful? Why or why not?
Chapter
Focus on Instructions
Read the sample instructions on the next page and answer these questions:
How does the writer make it clear what to do fi rst, second, and so on?
•
How many actions does each step represent?
•
How does each step begin?
•
Under “Charge the Battery,” besides telling the reader what to do, what
•
other information is included?
What is the purpose of the two boxed notes, the graphics, and the two
•
headings?
What If?
The user had previously owned a BlackBerry® phone?
•
The user had never owned a cell phone?
•
The user was not a strong native speaker of English?
•
The instructions were spoken rather than written?
•
Goals
Analyze your audience’s expectations and
◾
the steps required for instructions
Determine an appropriate format for
◾
instructions
Prepare a clear, concise set of instructions
◾
Terms
cautions, p. 233
◾
concurrent testing, p. 241
◾
explanation, p. 239
◾
field-test, p. 241
◾
imperative mood, p. 237
◾
instructions, p. 231
◾
online instructions, p. 243
◾
retrospective testing, p. 242
◾
step, p. 237
◾
warnings, p. 233
◾
Instructions | 229
Image not available due to copyright restrictions
230 | Chapter 10
Writing@Work
Aaron Wartner is an application and
database administrator for Accenture,
an IT consulting firm in Cincinnati,
Ohio. In his role, he is responsible for
maintaining a digital planning system
used by Accenture’s customers.
Aaron’s job creates a link between customers who use Accenture’s
technology and the technology itself. He has the tricky task of
communicating with both his “techy” colleagues and with clients.
“Much of my time is spent e-mailing information to or requesting
action from my coworkers. I also write instructions for customers’
scheduled maintenance activities that describe how to perform
the work, how to coordinate with other teams, and the timing for
each action.”
Writing technical instructions that are easy to follow is not an
easy task. “Instructions must be interpreted the same way by
every reader to be successful,” says Aaron. “So they must be
understandable, and the intent must be clear. Consistency in
describing objects and activities and careful use of technical jargon are a few
ways I try to meet these goals.”
Aaron begins writing a set of instructions for a certain task by doing that task
himself. “I start by walking through the process to understand the flow of steps
and to make sure that what I am doing will work. I identify and record each
basic step as I go, preserving the order of steps. Once I have all of the steps, I
create an outline of the process. Finally, I word the instructions for each step
based on who the intended audience is.”
After Aaron finishes a set of instructions, he follows them in his company’s test
system to make sure they work. “Having a test system allows us to fix errors in
our instructions before they reach customers.”
Think Critically
1. Do you think Aaron expected to do so much writing on his job? Explain.
2. Convert Aaron’s description of the process he follows (paragraphs 4 and 5)
into a simple set of instructions.
Printed with permission of Aaron Wartner
Courtesy of Stephen Freas
Instructions | 231
GETTING STARTED ON INSTRUCTIONS
Imagine you just purchased a new cabinet for your home theater system.
You want to assemble the cabinet before your friends arrive to watch a
movie. You have two hours to put the cabinet together. Because you are on
a tight schedule, you begin to assemble the furniture without looking at the
instructions. “It can’t be that hard,” you mumble under your breath. You are
certain that reading the instructions will slow you down. An hour and a half
later, you are still trying to connect the pieces. You are frantic because your
guests will be knocking on your door in 30 minutes—and the cabinet is still
in pieces on the fl oor. Finally, you look at the instructions, the sequence of
steps explaining how to complete a task.
Who Reads Instructions?
People who read instructions need to perform a task or understand how
someone else performs that task. The server being asked to close a restaurant
needs to know the procedure for doing so. The surveyor measuring a road
for underground pipes needs to know how to determine traffi c patterns. You,
assembling your newly purchased home theater cabinet, need to know how
to set it up as quickly as possible.
You can empathize with a reader trying to follow a set of instructions.
Instructions, with their graphics and technical language, can be intimidating.
Consequently, some readers read instructions carefully, paying close
attention to every word.
On the other hand, many readers, similar to you in the situation above, are
impatient, trying to go through the steps without reading them fi rst. Some
readers, thinking they are familiar with the procedure, read only a few steps
and think they know what to do. Other readers rely more on the graphics
than the words for information.
Do you usually read
instructions before you
attempt a procedure? Why or
why not?
Warm Up
You can view sample
instructions at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 10;
then click Sample Documents.
To understand how your
audience aﬀ ects the way
you write instructions, see
Instructions for a Preschooler
and a Teenager at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 10; then click
Sample Documents.
Fancy (RF)/Jupiter Images
232 | Chapter 10
Whatever their approach, readers trust the writer to give
them accurate, precise information in the proper sequence.
Some instructions—electrical installation and medical
procedures, for example—can be matters of life or death. For
example, the instructions for installing a new light fi xture can
put a do-it-yourself home owner in danger of electric shock if
the instructions fail to say “Before installing the fi xture, turn
off all electrical power running to the light outlet.” In those
cases, readers trust writers with their lives and with the lives
of others.
Because your reader trusts you, you must make sure that your
instructions are accurate and thorough. The amount of detail
depends on how much knowledge your audience has about
the process. A beginner, for example, needs more detail than
someone with experience. Good instructions keep readers
motivated to read carefully.
Planning Instructions
Before writing your own instructions, you must understand the procedure
about which you are writing. If you understand the procedure, you will
be better able to explain it to someone else. If you do not understand
the procedure, your readers probably will not understand it either. When
possible, work through the process yourself to see where your readers may
get tripped up.
Use the following suggestions to analyze the process and to better
understand the steps, the series of actions required to complete the
process:
1. Create a fl owchart with steps to the process. Write what someone should
do fi rst, second, third, and so on. Do not to skip any steps. Add and remove
steps as needed.
2. In your mind, work the process backward. What is the purpose of the
procedure? What is done last, next to last, third to last, and so on?
3. Watch a member of your target audience performing the task for the fi rst
time. Take notes. What is the very fi rst step? What is the most diffi cult
step? Which steps does the person misunderstand? Would additional
information make things clearer? Interview this person after he or she has
completed the procedure. Ask for suggestions to help you write a clear set
of instructions.
STOP AND THINK
What would you tell a 4-year-old about making a peanut butter and jelly sandwich
that you would not tell a person your age?
TYPICAL READER
Any person, whether technician, professional,
or client/customer, who needs to follow
guidelines, procedures, or directions to
complete a task.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Analyzing a process to present clear, detailed,
and precise instructions with appropriate
explanations, cautions, warnings, and graphic
elements to enable users to follow steps
successfully to complete a task.
Instructions | 233
ORGANIZING AND FORMATTING
INSTRUCTIONS
Now that you have analyzed the steps for your instructions, organize your
information into sections for your reader. Then place that information into a
sequence of chronological steps and an easy-to-read format.
Organizing Instructions
All instructions include steps of procedures and appropriate explanations
along with additional details to clarify the procedure. However, instructions
often contain other parts as well. Whether to include these parts depends on
the audience and the purpose of the instructions.
Different writing situations require different organizational strategies.
Although most instructions begin with an introduction, some do not.
For example, the manual for a new car may contain an introduction
at the beginning, but not for each major section. Furthermore, not all
instructions require a list of materials. For example, telling someone how
to use a blender would require only familiarity with the appliance, not a
list of materials. But telling someone how to make pancakes would require
a list of materials and ingredients.
Some instructions might require cautions, statements to indicate which
actions might harm the mechanism. Others might require stronger
warnings, statements to indicate which actions might cause injury or
johnsfon/iStockphoto.com
How do you prefer to receive
a set of instructions? Do you
want to read written steps
or to be told how to do
something? Do you prefer
watching someone perform
a procedure or looking at
pictures or a drawing of what
to do?
Warm Up
234 | Chapter 10
harm to someone trying to follow the instructions. When you delete a
fi le from your computer, a caution appears to ask whether you really
want to send the fi le to the recycle bin. The instructions telling you
how to administer fl ea and tick protection to your cat warn about the
danger of the product coming in contact with your skin. Even your bag
of popcorn has a warning: “HANDLE CAREFULLY—CONTAINS HOT AIR
AND STEAM.” You, too, are responsible for including proper cautions and
warnings with any instructions you write.
Use Table 10.1 to determine what elements to add to instructions.
INCLUDE
IF
Cautions
Your reader could damage equipment by doing a step incor-
rectly. Insert cautions in your text before readers are likely to do
anything harmful. Often a symbol or graphic accompanies the
caution.
Definitions
Your reader must learn new terms to perform the procedure.
Define six or more terms in a separate list or glossary. Define fewer
than six terms when you first use the term.
Less
Explanation
Your reader has performed the process before or the process is an
emergency procedure in which reading explanations would prevent
the reader from acting quickly.
More
Explanation
Your reader is performing the process for the first time, the proce-
dure is complicated, or the reader needs to know more to perform
the procedure correctly.
Graphics
A picture, diagram, or flowchart would make the instructions
easier to follow. Place a graphic as close as possible to the step it
illustrates—above, below, or beside. Avoid placing the graphic on
another page or at the end of the instructions.
Introduction
Your reader would benefit from any or all of the following
information: background, purpose (what readers will be able
to do when they finish), intended audience, scope (what the
instructions do and do not cover), organization, best way to read
the instructions, assumptions about readers’ knowledge or abilities,
and/or motivation to read the instructions carefully. An introduction
appears at the beginning of the document.
Materials/
Tools
Your reader should gather materials, tools, or ingredients before
following your instructions. Place this list before the steps.
Notes/
Tips
Additional but not essential information would aid your reader’s
understanding. Include a note immediately after the step to which
it pertains.
Warnings
Your reader could get hurt by overlooking a step or not doing a
step correctly. Place warnings before the reader is likely to do any-
thing dangerous. Often a symbol or graphic that represents danger
accompanies the warning.
Table 10.1
Instructions | 235
Formatting Instructions
Because readers are likely to be different and are often impatient, the format
of your instructions should be easy to read. Use plenty of white space to
make instructions look accessible. Number your steps using Arabic numerals
(1, 2, 3, and so on) and align the steps in a list.
Another effective way to make instructions easy to use is to incorporate
graphics such as fl owcharts and diagrams. Graphics simplify a process
and are useful for an intermediate reader who has performed the process
before and needs only a quick refresher. Graphics aid the beginner as well,
who will rely on both graphics and text to follow the procedure correctly.
Sometimes different parts of a mechanism are shown at different times in the
steps. Refer to your graphics with an explanatory statement such as “Refer
to Figure 1 to see the location of buttons on the DVD player.” You may add
callouts that point to specifi c parts of your diagram to help readers fi nd the
parts you are discussing. Instructions that include referral statements cue the
reader to look at the graphic at the appropriate time.
Formats may vary. For example, simple instructions may include only a one-
sentence introduction and a list of numbered steps. Some instructions may
contain only pictures. More complex instructions require several sections and
graphics. A numbered list is preferred to defi ne steps that must be completed
in a certain order, although some instructions use letters or bullets to
indicate steps. Figure 10.1 below and Figure 10.2 on the next page illustrate
two simple formats for instructions.
tri-color installation
hp officejet 500, 600 & 700 series
hp printer/scanner/copier 300 series
Figure 10.1 Instructions Using Pictures Only
236 | Chapter 10
Figure 10.2 Simple Instructions with a List of Steps
STOP AND THINK
Why does the organization of a set of instructions change from one set to another?
How can page layout help someone read and follow instructions more effectively?
What are some graphics that help readers better understand instructions?
Instructions | 237
COMPOSING INSTRUCTIONS
Organization, format, and graphics may vary, but all instructions require
chronological steps. Except for instructions written for experienced readers,
most instructions require explanations to accompany the steps.
Steps
A step is the action that a reader performs—what the reader actually does.
Steps have a consistent and unique structure. Use the following guidelines
for writing steps:
1. Make sure steps proceed forward in time—numbered, or in some cases
lettered—with no backtracking to pick up a step that was forgotten.
✓ Forward in Time
a. Buckle your seat belt.
b. Insert the key into the ignition
switch.
c. Turn the key forward until the
engine starts.
✗ Backtracking
a. Insert the key into the ignition
switch.
b. Turn the key forward until the
engine starts.
c. Buckle your seat belt before you
turn the key forward.
2. Begin each step with an active-voice verb in the imperative mood
(a command: verb+object) and use second person (stated or understood
“you” as the subject).
✓ Action Verb to Start
Trim the tip of the dog’s nail.*
✗ No Verb to Start
The tip of the dog’s nails should be
trimmed.
* You can begin with a modifying word or phrase, as in “Carefully trim the tip of the dog’s
nail” or “To ensure a pain-free procedure, trim the tip of the dog’s nail.”
3. Use short sentences, which keep your reader focused on one step at
a time. An overly complex or compound-complex sentence can create
confusion.
✓ Short Sentences
Install a smoke detector inside
each bedroom in which an
occupant sleeps with the door
closed. Smoke blocked by the
door might not sound an alarm
in the hallway. Also, the sleeper
might not hear an alarm coming
from another area of the house.
✗ Long Sentence
Install a smoke detector inside each
bedroom in which an occupant
sleeps with the door closed because
smoke blocked by the door might not
sound the alarm in the hallway and
the sleeper might not hear an alarm
coming from another area of the
house.
Look at the sample instructions
on page 229. Find the
sentences that actually tell the
reader to do something.
What do you notice about the
wording of these sentences?
What do the other sentences
tell the reader?
Warm Up
238 | Chapter 10
4. Write only one instruction (one action) for each step.
Exception: If two steps are closely tied to each other in time, reading them
in the same step might be easier for the reader: “Release the clutch. At the
same time, press the accelerator.”
✓ One Instruction per
Step
a. Place your chin on the chin
rest.
b. Look at the light.
✗ More Than One Instruction
per Step
Place your chin on the chin rest and
look at the light.
5. Make sure each step is truly a step—an action, something to do.
A description implies action, but it does not direct the reader to actually
do something.
✓ An Action
Grasp the rope when it comes
back to you.
✗ A Description
The rope will come back to you.
6. Keep the natural articles a, an, and the.
✓ With Articles
Send the electrician a notice to
connect power to the house.
✗ Without Articles
Send electrician notice to connect
power to house.
7. Include precise, specifi c details (measurements, sizes, locations, time,
parts, and restatement in more familiar language) to show your reader
exactly what to do.
✓ Suffi cient Details
Loosen the chain to provide 3⁄8"
of movement, or “give,” between
the front and rear sprockets.
✗ Not Suffi cient Details
Loosen the chain to provide some
movement, or “give,” in the chain.
8. Place any necessary explanations after the step. Placing the step fi rst keeps
the reader on task.
✓ Explanation After Step
Touch the number pad to enter
the weight of the food to be
defrosted. Make sure you enter
the weight in pounds and tenths
of pounds.
✗ Explanation Before Step
Make* sure you enter the weight in
pounds and tenths of pounds. Touch
the number pad to enter the weight
of the food to be defrosted.
*Although Make is a verb, it does not indicate a step, but explains how to enter the weight.
Instructions | 239
9. Use substeps when a major step is too broad to be clearly understood by
your reader.
✓ Use of Substeps
Play a G major chord.
a. Place your third fi nger on the
third fret of the bottom string.
b. Place your second fi nger on
the second fret of the fi fth
string.
c. Place your third fi nger on the
third fret of the fi rst string.
✗ Overgeneralized Step*
Play a G major chord.
* Whether to use substeps depends on your audience’s knowledge and experience with the
procedure.
Explanations
An explanation is an extension of the step it explains. An
explanation uses the same number as the step it follows and is
written immediately after the step.
1. Write the step. Then write the explanation if it is needed.
2. Write another step. Then write the explanation if it is needed.
3. Write another step. Then write the explanation if it is needed.
The number and type of explanations depend on your reader’s
previous experience. Not every step requires an explanation, but
well-placed explanations guide and motivate your reader. Often
explanations are written as a note following the step. Typical
explanations include the following:
What not to do and why
◾
Darken the appropriate oval with a No. 2 pencil. Do not place
stray pencil marks on the answer sheet. The computerized
scanner may read the stray mark as an error.
Note: Warnings and cautions are important enough to include
before the step that may cause a problem if it is not completed correctly.
Why a step is important
◾
Rinse the boiled egg with cold water as soon as you remove it from boiling
water. The cold water will cause the egg to contract from the shell, making
the egg easier to peel.
What happens when the reader does something
◾
(1) Press PROGRAM on the remote control. The MENU will appear on the
TV screen. (2) To autoscan for a channel, press CHANNEL SCAN once
on the remote control. The tuner scans the channels stored in the tuner’s
memory, stopping on each channel for about two seconds.
The Plain Language Action and
Information Network (PLAIN) is a
government initiative mandating the use
of plain, clear language in government
documents. The site oﬀ ers writing tips
for making procedures easy to follow.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 10.
Do a search for the No Gobbledygook
Award and read about it. Print an
example of a document written by a
winner of this award. How does the
document exemplify the use of plain
language?
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
240 | Chapter 10
How to perform the action—more detail
◾
Tighten the axle nuts. Make sure they are tight. There must not be any
space between the inner nut, the wheel slip, and the axle nuts. If there is
space, tighten the axle nuts more securely.
What terms to defi ne
◾
Beat the eggs until frothy, or until they look like sea foam. or A digital
signal transmits electrical data using binary code, or “off” and “on”
pulses.
Note: If you have a number of defi nitions (approximately six or more),
consider adding a separate section labeled “Defi nitions” or ”Glossary.” If
you have fewer than six, defi ne them as you write or place them in the
introduction.
How to make a decision
◾
Wrap a small section of hair around the curling iron. If you want curls to
fl ip up, wrap the hair backward (away from the shoulders). If you want
curls to curve under, wrap the hair down (toward the shoulders).
Note: Branching the two methods into substeps is another possibility:
1. Wrap a small section of hair around the curling iron.
a. If you want curls to fl ip up, wrap the hair backward.
b. If you want curls to curve under, wrap the hair downward.
Because some readers need more details, you must think carefully about
how much explanation to add. Consider the answers to the questions that
follow.
What should readers not do? Why?
◾
Would readers be more likely to perform the steps correctly if they knew
◾
the signifi cance of the action, the reason for performing the step, or more
about the process?
Would pointing out what should happen when readers execute a step help
◾
them? (The fi rst time you performed the process, how did you know you
had performed a step correctly?)
Does the reader need help making a decision? Should some steps be
◾
subdivided into if/then scenarios? Refer to the curling iron example at the
top of the page.
Would the reader benefi t from a brief defi nition?
◾
What questions will readers have?
◾
What are the most crucial steps, those steps that
◾
must be done correctly?
Finally, think back to the fi rst time you performed the procedure and how
awkward it felt to be a beginner.
What did you do wrong the fi rst time you performed the process?
◾
What questions did you have the fi rst time you performed the process?
◾
Instructions | 241
When you pick up a prescription from the pharmacy, you receive an insert
that gives you information about the drug—instructions for use, proper
doses, and risks. By giving patients and doctors more information on which
to base judgments about good health, drug companies accept an ethical
responsibility to protect their consumers. Warnings appear on the inserts in
order of risk severity:
■ Contraindications
■ Warnings
■ Precautions
■ Adverse reactions
In addition to these four risk categories, the FDA requires another category
for selected drugs to indicate special problems that may lead to serious injury
or death. These problems are displayed prominently in a box as a warning to
consumers and physicians. Based on clinical data, the black box warning alerts
physicians to carefully monitor the health of patients taking these drugs.
Think Critically
Why are the warnings given to both consumers and physicians?
Focus on
Ethics
Field Tests
Always fi eld-test your instructions by asking several people to try them
before you send your fi nal copy. Your fi eld testers can provide you with
valuable feedback by noting wording that is not clear, steps that are out of
sequence, or steps that have been left out altogether. To administer a fi eld
test, also called a usability test, you must select a test method, design the
test, select test subjects, and make revisions based on the data.
Concurrent testing and retrospective testing, discussed next, are two fi eld
tests that evaluate how effectively users can perform your instructions.
Concurrent Testing
Concurrent testing evaluates a product while it is being used or an activity
while it is being performed. In a concurrent test, you observe your subjects
reading and performing your instructions. You measure such things as their
accuracy, speed, recall, and attitude.
Rhonda adapted an informal method of concurrent testing to evaluate
instructions she wrote. Her instructions told AmeriCorps volunteers how to fi nd
the campsite for their training retreat. To make sure all 50 volunteers would
fi nd the site, she asked three classmates to follow her directions using a map
she had drawn. Two classmates did not arrive at the campsite because they
turned onto Riverside Road instead of Riverview Road. As a result, Rhonda
knew that she needed to revise her instructions to emphasize the name of the
correct road and to caution drivers against making the wrong turn. Because of
the information Rhonda learned, all AmeriCorps volunteers found their way.
Practice conducting a ﬁ eld
test using the Field Test
Activity worksheet available
at www.cengage.com/
school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 10;
then click Data Files.
242 | Chapter 10
Concurrent testing for longer instructions involves a more
formal procedure. For example, Arturo, the service manager
for Satellite Dish Subsidiaries, wants to make sure that his
instructions for installing a satellite dish for TV and Internet
service are clear. He selects fi ve test subjects in a rural
community who range in age from 21 to 41 because these
are the types of people who will likely be installing the dish.
He then watches each person install the dish, taking notes
about their errors, comments, questions, and frustrations.
After watching the fi ve subjects perform the installation,
Arturo knows that two of them had diffi culty mounting the
dish in the correct location at the proper angle. He realizes
that his steps about placement are confusing because each
step contains too much information. So he makes the steps
shorter and adds a roof diagram to show suggested areas for
placement.
To design a useful concurrent study, decide whether your
subjects should complete the whole procedure or just selected
tasks. Rhonda and Arturo asked their subjects to perform the
entire task. On the other hand, a usability study focuses only
on selected tasks. One usability study of a website advertising
cars asked users to perform these specifi c tasks: fi nd the “sale
of the day,” descriptions of used models, and information
about warranties.
As you observe your test subjects, ask yourself these questions:
Were the subjects able to do what the instructions told them to do?
◾
How long did the subjects take to complete the task?
◾
How many mistakes did the subjects make?
◾
What steps were most diffi cult? least diffi cult?
◾
Were the subjects frustrated at any time? If so, explain.
◾
What did the subjects remember about the task 15 minutes after
◾
completing it?
What did the subjects remember about the task 24 hours after completing it?
◾
You also can ask subjects to think aloud, reading the instructions aloud and
saying whatever comes to mind. Through this window to subjects’ thoughts,
you see how they are reacting to each step. You may want to record their
performance so you can review it more closely later.
Retrospective Testing
A second way to test instructions is through the use of retrospective testing—
asking subjects to complete a questionnaire or to answer questions about
a task after they have performed it. Many fi eld tests use a concurrent test
along with a retrospective test. This way testers gain additional insights into
the behavior of test subjects.
Surveys often are used for retrospective testing. Remember that a survey can
include different types of questions. On the next page, Figure 10.3 shows
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Many companies use interactive video to
train employees. This choice saves companies
money by avoiding costly travel expenses
when employees must go somewhere
else for specialized training. Interactive
video places instructional material on a CD.
Employees load the CD, study it at their
own pace, and interact by keying answers or
comments. Training is available on a host of
topics, including sales techniques, museum
operations, and information technologies.
Think Critically
List the pros and cons of face-to-face training
sessions in a classroom setting and of
distance-learning training with interactive
video.
Instructions | 243
questions that Kelsey plans to ask his loan offi cers after they have fi eld-
tested his procedures for completing a car loan application.
Regardless of the test method you use, select a reasonable sample of subjects.
To ask senior accountants to test instructions for using a machine lathe is
not practical because they would not use the instructions. You would ask
senior accountants to test instructions for new accounting software. Some
experts recommend using at least fi ve testers, but others do not believe that
fi ve testers is enough—especially for a longer document such as a manual or
for interactive media such as a website. After completing your fi eld test, you
should compile your data, list problems from most frequent to least frequent,
and devise solutions.
Online Instructions
No doubt you have used online instructions, or computer-based instructions,
to order concert tickets, to track a UPS delivery, to set up e-mail and instant
messenger accounts, or to complete a job application. Online instructions allow
users to fi nd out something, to get something, or to learn something quickly.
Online instructions include help menus, CD-ROMs, and web-based instructions.
Help menus are one of the most popular types of online instructions. Most
computer programs feature a help menu, typically in the upper right corner of
the screen, or balloon help, the explanation that appears when you scroll over a
menu item. Think about your educational career. You may recall using tutorials
on a website or a CD-ROM to teach yourself grammar, keyboarding, or a foreign
language.
Retrospective Test Questions
Question Types
Questions
Multiple Choice
Was the introduction informative? Yes____ No____
After fi lling in the applicant’s name, address, Social Security
number, and telephone number (steps 1–4), the next step
was to
a. Enter the amount of money requested.
b. Include the value of the car.
c. Enter the current interest rate.
Likert Scale
Rank on a scale of 1–10 (with 10 being most satisfi ed and 1
being least satisfi ed) your satisfaction with the completeness*
of this document.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Short Answer
Describe the fi rst step you performed.
After reading step 6 (perhaps a critical step such as entering
gross income), what did you think you were supposed to do?
Open
What suggestions do you have for improvement?
What was the most diffi cult section? Why?
*Kelsey could ask about clarity of the wording or usefulness of the graphics.
Figure 10.3 Survey Questions for a Retrospective Field Test
244 | Chapter 10
To write online instructions, keep in mind the strategies presented in this
chapter for writing and explaining steps, using white space and graphics,
and providing cautions and warnings. In addition to the guidelines for
writing paper-based instructions, online instructions should:
Limit each unit of instruction to one screen size so it is not necessary for
◾
the user to scroll down the page.
Use consistent design—font, font sizes, colors, graphics, and headers—so
◾
the reader learns to anticipate the organization and feels comfortable
navigating.
Provide a tree or map of the site and topics so readers can see the site at a
◾
glance.
Insert navigational aids such as a link to the home page and to other
◾
important pages.
Use keyword searches with several synonyms for the same action.
◾
Evaluate the usefulness of the instructions with a fi eld test, revising the
◾
instructions if necessary.
Also, if you are teaching users to perform tasks on a screen, confi gure
instructions so they do not take up the entire screen. By confi guring your
instructions this way, you allow users to work on the screen while they read
the instructions.
You have just landed a job as a trainer for an international company that
makes engines for fighter planes. Your job is to train new engineers, line
managers, and other employees to assemble specific engine parts. This
coming Monday you will conduct your first training session online, and your
job is to prepare the training materials for the session.
On Friday afternoon before the scheduled training, your manager tells you
that many employees taking the training are not from the United States.
Participants live in Russia, Taiwan, Germany, and Japan. In addition, your
boss explains that many of the trainees do not speak English.
Think Critically
How do you revise your training materials so that international employees will
understand them?
Communication
Dilemma
STOP AND THINK
How are steps written? What kind of information do explanations contain? What
kind of information makes instructions precise? Why is field testing important?
How can a writer field-test instructions? What strategies should you keep in
mind when writing online instructions?
Instructions | 245
Chapter 10
Review
SUMMARY
1. Readers of instructions can be in a hurry, so writers must learn to
compensate with carefully planned writing. Readers trust writers to be
accurate and safety-conscious and to provide adequate explanation in
their instructions.
2. All instructions contain itemized steps. Most instructions contain an
introduction and graphics. The process and the audience determine
whether a list of materials, warnings, cautions, notes, or defi nitions
should be included.
3. Instructions are written in short chronological sentences using
active voice and imperative mood. Each step must show an action.
Explanations follow steps and tell what not to do, why a step is
performed, what the results of a step are, and how to complete
a step. Explanations should provide enough details to enable the
reader to perform the step correctly and safely. When creating online
instructions, the writer should limit each unit of instruction to one
screen, use a consistent design (font, colors, and graphics), provide
a tree or map of the site and topics, insert navigational aids on the
home page, and confi gure instructions so that users performing tasks
on the screen can see them while working.
Checklist
Do I thoroughly understand the procedure about which I am writing?
◾
Did I consider using graphics?
◾
Did I consider using an introduction, a list of materials, cautions,
◾
warnings, and notes?
Have I written steps that move forward in time? Do my steps begin with
◾
a verb that commands? Have I used short sentences that include only one
action per step? Are my steps truly steps, things to do? Have I kept the
articles a, an, and the?
Have I considered including explanations that tell what not to do and
◾
why? that include signifi cant details to help the reader understand why a
step is important? that tell the reader how to make a decision? that include
descriptions of what will happen when the reader does something? that
give enough details on how something should be done?
Have I included enough precise details (for example, distances, sizes,
◾
places, or time)?
Have I considered whether online instructions would be appropriate for my
◾
audience? Have I followed the additional guidelines for online instructions?
Did I fi eld-test my instructions with my target audience?
◾
246 | Chapter 10
Build Your Foundation
1. Examine each step below. What kind of information would make each
instruction more specifi c?
a. Rotate the tool several times around the wire, leaving the spring
closed.
b. Draw part of an oval for the head.
c. If the fi tting has a tub spout, make a hole in the wall.
d. Clean your room before you leave.
e. Beat the meringue until stiff peaks form.
f. Place the selvages of the material together.
2. Break up each sentence into shorter sentences that refl ect one step per
sentence.
a. Remove the cover from the mic; press the transmit button on the mic;
and by using a small screwdriver with a plastic or wooden handle,
adjust the transmitting frequency.
b. Take the two upper sections of the handle and using the shortest
bolt with the nut provided, fasten them together as shown in the
illustration in Figure 1.
c. Read the passage and locate all nouns, underlining them with a single
line.
3. Rewrite these steps so that each one begins with a verb in active voice
and imperative mood. (The “you” can be understood.)
a. The cook should touch the AUTO DEFROST pad to begin the
defrosting process.
b. When you want to play, you should press the START button.
c. The aquarium fl oor requires a layer of gravel that, sloping from back
to front, is about 6 to 8 centimeters deep at the front wall.
d. We want you to come to the front of the room and use the available
podium.
4. Label each of the following as steps, explanations, cautions, or warnings.
a. When paddling, keep the canoe in line with the current.
b. Make sure the supply voltage matches the voltage specifi ed on the
rating plate.
c. Separate dark clothes from light clothes to prevent colors from running.
d. Do not overload your dryer. For effi cient drying, clothes need to tumble
freely.
e. When you have recorded your message, press the pound key.
f. When the virus protection window appears, click OK immediately
to decontaminate your drive. Failure to heed the virus warnings may
cause you to lose data and contaminate other machines.
g. To determine how tight the fasteners need to be, see the Torque Range
chart in the back of this book.
5. Which of these guidelines for writing instructions apply to all
instructions (print and online)? Which apply only to online instructions?
a. Make sure each step represents only one action unless the actions are
so closely related that they need to be in the same step.
Instructions | 247
b. Limit each unit of instruction to one screen size.
c. Evaluate the usefulness of your instructions with a fi eld test.
d. Use a consistent design for each screen.
e. Provide a tree or map of your site and topics.
f. Do not omit a, an, and the.
g. Eliminate your reader’s need to scroll down the page.
h. Insert navigational aids such as links to important pages.
i. Include appropriate cautions, warnings, and notes.
j. Use active-voice verbs in imperative mood for steps.
6. For a beginner using a word processing program such as WordPerfect® or
Microsoft® Word, list help topics that this person would most likely use.
7. Visit WebMD.com to see online instructions for preventing the common
cold. Are the instructions clear? Explain.
Your Turn
8. In small groups, write instructions for any of the following processes (or
other process with which you are familiar). Analyze your audience, follow
the guidelines for composing instructions and provide ample explanations.
making a bed
cleaning a room
changing the oil/tires
setting up a tent
using a calculator
playing a video game
setting up an aquarium
lifting weights
constructing a craft
brushing your teeth
mowing the lawn
changing a diaper
administering first aid
creating artwork
doing a yoga move
9. You have been asked to write online help instructions for a word
processing program you know well. Write your instructions for one of
these processes:
a. Changing the font type for an entire document
b. Underlining a word
c. Changing the margins
d. Copying and pasting a paragraph
e. Cutting and pasting a paragraph
f. Wrapping text around a photograph
Community Connection
10. Based on your experience and interviews with other students, write
instructions for new students that explain how to register for classes or
for a particular program. Although your school probably has registration
instructions, the document you develop should be an “insider’s guide”
of insights that you and other students have gained about more direct
methods, pitfalls, situations to avoid, and classes to take together and
classes to avoid taking in the same term. For the new students, defi ne
unfamiliar terms and give precise locations and descriptions.
11. Visit a nonprofi t organization in your community and learn about the
procedures and processes used there. Ask if you can help by developing
written instructions for a task or procedure, such as steps for closing
the facility at the end of the day, making an enlargement on the copier,
orienting a volunteer, or answering an offi ce telephone.
248 | Chapter 11
Employment
Communication
Chapter
Focus on Employment Communication
Read the sample resume on the next page and answer these questions:
Glance at the resume for ten seconds and then look away. What do you
•
remember? In other words, what stands out?
Does the resume look balanced and attractive? Explain.
•
What information is included in each major section?
•
How does Matt’s work experience relate to his job objective?
•
What impression does his earning some of his college expenses make?
•
What kind of impression does his volunteer work make?
What If?
Matt had 15 years experience in the computer industry? 10 years in the
•
restaurant business? 5 years of military experience?
Matt had won an academic scholarship or an award for web design?
•
Matt were applying for a faculty position or a graphic arts position?
•
Terms
chronological resume,
◾
p. 257
cover letter, p. 251
◾
electronic resume, p. 259
◾
follow-up letter, p. 251
◾
functional resume, p. 257
◾
keywords, p. 261
◾
online resume, p. 262
◾
parallel structure, p. 265
◾
priority order, p. 257
◾
resignation letter, p. 251
◾
resume, p. 251
◾
reverse chronological order,
◾
p. 257
scannable resumes, p. 261
◾
solicited letter, p. 267
◾
text file, p. 261
◾
unsolicited letter, p. 267
◾
Goals
Plan employment communication
◾
Format and organize a resume
◾
Choose a type of resume
◾
Compose a resume
◾
Compose employment letters
◾
WRITE TO LEARN
Place yourself in the future, ten years from now. Write a one-page description
of your life. Where do you live? What talents and interests have you
pursued? What kind of job do you have? Are you happy with your job? How
much money do you make? How did you create this life? In other words,
how did you get here?
Employment Communication | 249
Matt R. Abboud
mabboud@comm.mcc.edu
Temporary
67B Whistle Run Apartments
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103-4737
505.555.0173
Permanent
803 Princeton Road
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87118-1190
505.555.0149
OBJECTIVE
Computer programmer in an industrial environment
QUALIFICATIONS
•
3 years’ experience in networking and computer support
•
AAS degree in Computer Programming
•
Experience in C ++, Microsoft SQL Server, Visual Basic 2008, and
Windows Server 2008
•
Proficient in all Microsoft Office (2000/XP) products
EDUCATION
Maddox Community College, Albuquerque, New Mexico
AAS, anticipated graduation May 2010
Major: Computer Programming, GPA 3.9/4.0
Major Courses
Advanced C++
Java Programming
UNIX Fundamentals
Windows Server
Admin
Visual Basic 2008
Database Concepts
Database Management
Interpersonal
Communication
Internet Programming
Systems Analysis/Design
International Business
Technical Writing
CO-OP
EXPERIENCE
Wadell Computer Industries
January 2010–Present
Albuquerque, New Mexico
•
Design and develop test specifications for software systems
•
Evaluate existing computerized systems to improve efficiency
•
Serve on Quality Assurance Team in IT department
Landcaster Microsystems
July 2009–December 2009
Santa Fe, New Mexico
•
Set up and maintained clients using Windows NT/Server 2008
•
Maintained SQL server database
•
Answered help desk calls
OTHER
EXPERIENCE
Earned half of college expenses working part-time
2005–2009
Auto Express, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Salesclerk
AG Shirt Factory, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Production Line Worker
VOLUNTEER
WORK
Special Olympics—Santa Fe, New Mexico
Big Brothers Big Sisters—Santa Fe, New Mexico
2006–2008
Sample Resume
Writing@Work
Kate Houck manages the Implementation
Team for Employment Law Training,
a San Francisco–based company
that provides employers with online
compliance training. In addition to a BA in political science, she has
extensive experience evaluating job applicants, interviewing, and
hiring employees for companies ranging from Internet startups to
Fortune 500s.
“The biggest challenge in reviewing a stack of resumes is culling
the wheat from the chaff,” explains Kate. “I look for a resume that
has a good layout and concise, engaging statements about relevant
experience and accomplishments. It should also demonstrate
passion for or expertise in something. You can usually teach
someone to do a job, but it is harder to teach someone to be an
employee who cares.”
The most glaring mistakes to avoid in a resume or cover letter are the easiest
ones to prevent. Kate emphasizes that these documents “should have no typos
or spelling errors. If you mess this up, you are just being careless.” She also
recommends that job candidates google themselves to eliminate undesirable
public listings: “It may not be fair, but your online presence serves as a sort
of reference in today’s electronic age. So if there is anything posted that you
don’t want an employer to see, make sure it is under a pseudonym or restricted
access; otherwise, it’s fair game.”
Having seen so many resumes has taught Kate precisely what makes a great
resume and how to make her own resume float to the top of the pile: “The top
two things I try to convey in my resume are competence and excellence. I not
only highlight what I have done at each job, but also provide evidence that
shows how I surpassed the objectives for that position. I don’t want to be just a
performer on my resume or at work; I want to be a star.”
Think Critically
1. Does your resume meet Kate’s standards for “good layout and concise,
engaging statements about relevant experience and accomplishments”?
Why or why not?
2. Would Kate see that you have “passion for or expertise in something?” How
can you change your resume so that someone like Kate puts it at the top of
the stack?
Printed with permission of Kate Houck
Courtesy of Kate Houck
250 | Chapter 11
Employment Communication | 251
GETTING STARTED ON EMPLOYMENT
COMMUNICATION
The job you seek may be a long-awaited dream job or a part-time job to help
you through school. Whatever the job, you will need attractive and well-
crafted employment communication to highlight your strengths for the job
market. You will use your technical writing skills to analyze your audience’s
needs and then persuade your audience that you can fulfi ll those needs.
Employment communication includes a resume (a one- or two-page
summary of your qualifi cations), a cover letter (to accompany the
resume), a follow-up letter (to thank the employer for the interview and
to summarize your qualifi cations), and possibly a resignation letter (to
announce your intention to resign). Resumes and the accompanying letters
are important because they:
Create a professional, favorable impression.
◾
Allow you to control the presentation of your skills on paper.
◾
Encourage an employer to call you to arrange an interview.
◾
Give employers something to look at before you fi ll out any applications
◾
they may require.
Maintain goodwill between you and your employer.
◾
To get started on employment communication, assess your strengths, learn
what you can about a prospective employer, and choose your references.
Then consider the employer’s perspective and expectations.
Assess Your Strengths
Good employment communication begins with self-assessment. Consider
your skills, aptitudes, education, interests, and experience. Use the following
questions to help you determine your strengths as an employee:
Education:
◾
What is your grade point average (GPA)? What special classes
have prepared you for a particular job? What degrees do you hold? Where
did you go to school, and when did you graduate?
Employment:
◾
What jobs have you held? Write the job title, city and state,
and dates for each job you now have or have previously held. Describe
your duties and special projects on the job. Be specifi c.
Accomplishments:
◾
List your accomplishments (scholastic, job-related,
extracurricular, or community) over the last several years. Include any
honors or awards you received. What skills do these accomplishments and
honors illustrate? Would these skills be useful in the workplace?
Skills:
◾
What are your special talents? What can you do well? Are you a
good problem solver, creative thinker, good communicator? Do you have
special skill sets—with computers, machinery, sales? Make a list, even if it
overlaps with something you have already written.
Character or personality traits:
◾
Are you dependable, honest, and fl exible?
Are you outgoing, calm, and optimistic? Do you have a good sense of humor?
If you were the chief
executive oﬃ cer of a
successful corporation, what
kinds of employees would
you hire? What would you
want to see on a resume?
Warm Up
252 | Chapter 11
When you fi nish your assessment, consider which responses would impress
a prospective employer. Now you should have a better idea of what makes
you valuable as an employee.
Research Your Prospective Employer
Learn all you can about your prospective employer, the company, and the
job. Call the human resources offi ce and fi nd out about the company’s hiring
practices. Do you know anyone who works for or used to work for this
company? You also can fi nd information about major American companies
in Hoover’s 500: Profi les of America’s Largest Business Enterprises. See if you
can fi nd the answers to the following questions:
Who will be responsible for making the decision to hire you—an
◾
individual or a committee? If it is an individual, what position does that
person hold? What skills is he or she looking for in an employee?
What can you fi nd out about the company—its mission statement, its
◾
current projects, its organization, its openings, or its past record?
What can you learn about the position for which you are applying? What
◾
would you be expected to do, and with whom would you work?
Ideally, you will be applying for a specifi c job with a particular company—a
Social Worker II position at the Richmond Department of Social Services, for
example. In reality, though, you also may send out a number of resumes to
different organizations for a certain kind of job. In these cases, you may not
have time to research the jobs in depth, but you still want to fi nd out what you
can about the positions and the organizations to which you are applying.
Choose Your References
A reference is a person who knows you well enough to vouch for your skills and
your character. This person should feel comfortable making positive statements
about your work performance, giving examples of your accomplishments, and
answering specifi c questions from a prospective employer.
technotr/iStockphoto.com
Employment Communication | 253
Choose three to fi ve people to include as references. Work references—
people for whom you have actually worked—make the best references.
After all, your employer is interested in knowing how well you perform on
the job. Educational references such as instructors, advisers, and guidance
counselors also can attest to your abilities. Including one personal reference,
someone (not a relative) who knows you well outside the workplace, is
acceptable as long as you also include strong work references.
Before you list someone as a reference, ask the person to agree to be a
reference for you. If this person hesitates or says no, ask someone else.
The trend today is not to include references on the resume, but to have a list
prepared in case you are asked to provide them. Then if you are granted an
interview, you can offer your list at that time.
Who Reads Employment Communication?
To write the best employment communication possible, you must understand
your audience by considering the employer’s perspective and expectations.
Employer’s Perspective
Generally, employers seek someone whose
credentials meet their company’s needs, whose
personality fi ts with their current staff, and
whose career plan complements their goals.
Employers are interested in an applicant’s
education, experience, skills, and work habits.
Employers also want employees who have
personal and professional integrity.
Your resume and cover letter show employers
that you have the skills they need. At this
stage, the resume and letter are the only means
employers have of knowing who you are and
what you can do for them. Therefore, you want
to create a good fi rst impression with your
communication.
If you have done a good job of writing, you
may be asked to interview for the job. In the
interview, you have an opportunity to convince
the employer that you are the candidate for
whom he or she is looking. Thus, the goal of a
resume and a cover letter is to create enough
interest to be granted an interview. The goal
of the interview is to persuade an employer to
hire you.
Audience awareness is especially important
when you are writing a resume and a cover
letter. Focusing on the reader of the resume
may be diffi cult because the resume is primarily
about the writer. Nonetheless, because the
reader is the person who does the hiring, his or
stray_cat/iStockphoto.com
254 | Chapter 11
her needs are most important. Let the keywords in the job announcement
guide your writing and put yourself in the shoes of the individual doing the
hiring.
Employer’s Expectations
Your prospective employer expects your communication to conform to
standard employment protocol. Employment communication must:
Contain no errors. Resumes with misspellings, typos, and
◾
punctuation errors are routinely cast aside during initial
screenings.
Look neat and professional. For example, a resume with
◾
smeared ink or one whose print is too light makes the writer
look careless. To look professional, resumes should be printed
in letter-quality print on bonded (heavy, stiff) paper.
Follow an accepted format. A resume that is too long, for
◾
example, or one that is printed on colored paper or uses an
eccentric design looks as though the writer did not know how
to format a resume properly.
Emphasize your best qualities (even if you think you may be
◾
bragging).
STOP AND THINK
Choose three people who might agree to be references for you. What do you
think these people would say about you? Are they familiar with your career
goals? Why do employers discard some resumes initially? Why do employers
read selected employment communication carefully?
FORMATTING AND ORGANIZING RESUMES
Because employers may spend no more than 15 to 45 seconds looking at your
resume during the initial screening, you must make the resume memorable.
Here you have the opportunity to show off your skills with page design using
special features, appropriate headings, and organizational schemes.
Making Your Resume Stand Out
Have you ever noticed how some words in a newspaper or magazine ad jump
out at you—those words in large bold type surrounded by white space? The
ad is designed to create an immediate impression in a small amount of space.
Like a newspaper ad, the resume must impress a reader in little space.
After all, you are designing an ad and selling yourself, your skills, and
your expertise to a prospective employer. You want your most impressive
qualifi cations to jump out at the employer during his or her fi rst glance at
your resume. For a high school student or a newly graduated college student,
the resume should be only one page long. For people with several years of
TYPICAL READER
A busy manager scanning employment docu-
ments for key information.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Capturing the manager’s attention by placing
the most important qualiﬁ cations in carefully
designed and error-free employment documents.
Congratulations! You have
been voted Most Likely
to Succeed from your
graduating class. A short
article appears about you in
your yearbook. What does
the article say? Why are you
most likely to succeed?
Warm Up
Employment Communication | 255
impressive work experience, a two-page resume is acceptable. Electronic
resumes may be longer because they are generally scanned by a computer
program for the initial screening and not by human eyes.
Part of the design strategy, then, is to consider how the resume looks. White
space allowing ample margins results in a resume that is uncluttered and
easy to read. Special features such as boldfacing, underlining, italicizing,
CAPITALIZING, bullets (•), or asterisks (*) make important information
stand out. But too many special features can make your resume appear
cluttered and busy. The resume should look symmetric and balanced. Your
name should stand out in a larger boldfaced type. Headings should be easy
to spot. The font should be easy to read—Times New Roman, Calibri, or
Arial, for example, in 10- to 12-point type.
Consider setting up your resume as a table (hide the grid lines) with
information in columns and rows. You can place side headings in the fi rst
column and different sections in rows. Because side headings take up more
space, if you have additional information, you may want to center or left-
justify your headings.
Look at versions of resumes in this chapter as well as resumes on the
Web and in career books. Choose a layout that works for the amount of
information and the headings you decide to use. Your goal is to make your
resume stand out.
Deciding Which Headings to Include
Making decisions about which headings to include is like making decisions
about your daily wardrobe. You must put on certain clothes—jeans, shirts,
shoes, socks—whatever your basic wardrobe consists of. However, you can
choose accessories—jewelry, caps, scarves, belts—to express your individuality,
those things that set you apart from others. Similarly, a resume must include
basic information. However, optional headings, like accessories, highlight your
strengths, minimize your weaknesses, and set your resume apart from others.
Basic Information
Basic information consists of your identifi cation, education, and work
experience.
Identifi cation:
◾
Include your name, complete address, telephone
number(s), and e-mail address. You may include a permanent and
temporary address.
Education:
◾
Include the name, city, and state of the school from which you
graduated; your dates of attendance and graduation or expected date of
graduation; and your major or course of study. Sometimes it is helpful to
include specifi c courses you took, as well as academic honors, your overall
GPA or the GPA in your major classes (particularly if the GPA is good),
and any extracurricular activities. If you already have a postsecondary
degree, it is not necessary to list your high school degree.
Work Experience:
◾
Include the name, city, and state of the company and
the position or title and description of duties if it is related to the job
for which you are applying. You also may include promotions, special
accomplishments, and skills.
256 | Chapter 11
Optional Headings
Many different names for headings can appear on resumes. All of them
give your prospective employer a better idea of what you can do. Table 11.1
suggests some optional headings and offers a rationale for using each one.
POSSIBLE HEADINGS
PURPOSE
RATIONALE FOR USE
Job Objective
Objective
Career Objective
Professional Objective
To identify the job
or position for which
you are applying
Use if the employer must
determine what particular
job or category of jobs in
which to place you.
Skills/Abilities
Professional Skills
Leadership Skills
Technical Skills
Computer Skills
To highlight skills in a
chronological presentation
or in place of a chrono-
logical presentation
Use if you want to show
special skill sets, especially
those skills that are not
reflected in other sections.
Here is an opportunity to
highlight those skills that
were listed in the vacancy
announcement.
Military Experience
Military Service
ROTC
To summarize military
experience
Definitely use if you have
military experience.
Military personnel are
reputed to be dependable
and hard-working. Some
companies give preference
to veterans.
Work Experience
Other Work Experience
Related Experience
Computer Experience
Volunteer Work
To include experience not
directly related to the job
or to differentiate between
different kinds of appli-
cable work experience
Use if the experience
shows a consistent work
history or if the experi-
ence is remarkable in
some way. Experience
not directly related to the
job listing shows your
dependability and ability
to learn and work with
others.
Accomplishments
Honors
Awards
Achievements
To enhance your re-
sume with your unique
accomplishments
Use if you want to draw at-
tention to special awards,
recognitions, and honors
that complement educa-
tional and work-related
descriptions but do not
seem to fit under either.
Summary
Major Qualifications
Summary of Skills
To summarize your
qualifications in three to
five bullets or in a short
description
Use if you want to spe-
cifically relate your qualifica-
tions to the qualifications in
the job listing.
Table 11.1
Employment Communication | 257
Organizational Strategies
Two organizational strategies govern the writing of all resumes: reverse
chronological order and priority order.
Reverse Chronological Order
Some parts of the resume are presented in reverse chronological order
(backward through time). The priority here is time; that is, what is most
recent is considered to be most important. In particular, past jobs and
schools attended should be listed in reverse chronological order. For
example, when presenting your work experience, list your most recent job
fi rst, your second most recent job second, your third most recent job third,
and so on.
Priority Order
Major sections are presented in priority order—from most important to
least important. Whatever you present as most important should be the
information that is most important to the prospective employer. When you
have impressive work experience, that experience may be more important
to your employer than education. If so, place work experience before
education.
If you are a recent graduate without much work experience, you may want to
include education fi rst as the most important qualifi cation. If you use a skills
summary, you should place it early in the resume. That way, employers who
quickly skim your resume can focus on your major qualifi cations even if they
do not read further.
Within each section, lists of skills, duties, awards, and accomplishments also
are organized from most important to least important.
STOP AND THINK
Which optional headings would you include in your resume? Why would you
use them?
TYPES OF RESUMES
There are two fundamental types of resumes: the chronological resume and
the functional resume. The chronological resume organizes information
in reverse chronological order—or backward in time through a person’s
education and employment record—with the most recent information
presented fi rst. Instead of organizing information around time, the
functional resume organizes information around a person’s unique skills,
giving an applicant the opportunity to highlight his or her special abilities
or experience. This resume may have a section devoted to technical skills,
sales abilities, or leadership skills. Some resumes are a combination of
chronological and functional resumes, highlighting special skills in one area
and using a chronological presentation for the work history.
Consider the diﬀ erent
ways information can be
organized. For example,
when you study history, how
is the information organized?
When you study math, how is
the information organized?
Warm Up
258 | Chapter 11
Chronological Resume
A chronological resume offers an approach that most employers
recognize and accept. This resume:
Provides a history of employment (regardless of the job) and
◾
education in reverse chronological order.
Accounts for every year the applicant is out of school, with no
◾
gaps in time.
Tends to emphasize dates in the resume’s design.
◾
Uses predictable headings.
◾
Places education and work experience early in the resume.
◾
The chronological resume offers several advantages. First, it
is familiar to and readily accepted by employers. Second, it
can be read quickly. Third, it draws attention to a steady and
impressive work history.
Although the chronological resume is widely used, it is not ideal
for everyone. First, a lengthy work history may make the resume
too long. Second, the format is so structured that it may limit someone
whose qualifi cations do not fi t into its framework. For example, it may not
be fl exible enough for someone with little or no work experience. Third, it
may be so similar to other resumes that it does not stand out and may get
lost in the sameness of other chronological resumes.
Matt’s resume on page 249 is an example of a chronological resume. Matt
is applying for a job that is related directly to his degree. With only two
years of related work experience, he believes that his degree is his strongest
asset and that his related work experience (co-op) is his next strongest
asset. The dates, separated from the main text of the resume, stand out. He
lists his other work experience last because it is not as impressive as his
related work experience. Notice that he does not describe his other work
experience because it is not related to his job objective. Most employers
would understand what these part-time jobs entail and would note them
only because they show that Matt has a strong work ethic.
Functional Resume
Resumes organized according to function or purpose are more fl exible than
chronological resumes. Tailored to suit the requirements of a particular job, a
functional resume:
Summarizes the most important qualifi cations for the job.
◾
May not account for every year out of school.
◾
Emphasizes skills, accomplishments, and job titles regardless of time
◾
frame.
Uses less predictable headings designed for the job.
◾
May present education and work experience later in the resume.
◾
The functional resume offers several advantages. First, it helps the employer
judge what skills and accomplishments are useful for the job. Second, the
Several online sites can assist you with
your job search. The Occupational
Outlook Handbook, published annually
by the U.S. Department of Labor, gives
information about the job outlook,
salaries, and job conditions.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 11.
Read about two occupations that interest
you. After looking at the educational
requirements and job outlook, list the pros
and cons of pursuing one of these jobs.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Employment Communication | 259
functional resume can be used in a variety of circumstances. For example,
functional resumes are useful when you have plenty of work experience
and skills that would take up too much space on a chronological resume.
Functional resumes also are useful when applying for a job for which you
have no formal education but for which you have marketable skills. For
example, you may have learned carpentry skills from your father but do not
have a degree.
The structure of a functional resume is fl exible enough that you can minimize
time lapses in education or job experience. If you have time lapses in your
employment history, be prepared to account for them in an interview. Explain
the lapse quickly and discuss the constructive things you did while out of
work, such as taking classes or volunteering. Do not complain about being
laid off or about problems you may have had with your former supervisor.
Juanita’s resume in Figure 11.1 on the next page is a functional resume.
Juanita’s circumstances are different from Matt’s, and a functional resume
meets her needs. Juanita is not applying for her fi rst full-time job upon
graduating from college; she is applying for her fi rst part-time job while she
is in high school. Because she does not have a degree yet, her job skills are
more important than her education. She has little work experience, so she
capitalizes on her club and volunteer work to show that she can handle
offi ce responsibilities.
Electronic Resume
Technology has changed the way people look for and apply for jobs. Today
the Internet and e-mail offer electronic ways to send and post resumes. An
electronic resume is a chronological or functional resume that has been
reformatted so that it can be sent electronically. It may take one of the
following forms:
E-mail resume:
◾
Sent as a formatted attachment to an e-mail or as part of
an e-mail message
ASCII Text resume:
◾
Sent with special text formatting as an attachment to
or part of an e-mail
Scannable resume:
◾
Sent as an attachment to an e-mail, part of an e-mail
message, or mailed (but eventually scanned by an optical reader)
Online resume:
◾
Posted on a company’s or job search website or posted on
an applicant’s website
E-mail Resume
When sending an e-mail resume, whenever possible, you should send it as
an attachment that saves your formatting. Let your employer know what
software program and version you used to create the document. When
possible, ask whether another program is preferred. If the company to which
you are applying has the same word processing program you used to create
the resume, sending an attachment is the best option. This way, there is little
difference in the actual appearance of the electronic resume and the print
resume. The only difference is how the resume is sent.
260 | Chapter 11
On the other hand, if the company does not have the same program you
used to create the resume or if you are not sure about the program your
employer uses, you need to explore other options.
ASCII Text File
One option is to send the document as part of the e-mail message. In this
case, the employer receives the resume, but it may look jumbled with strange
characters when the employer opens the e-mail.
Figure 11.1 Functional Resume
l
Employment Communication | 261
To prevent the resume from looking jumbled, key the resume as
an ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange,
pronounced ask-ee) text fi le. A text fi le can be opened regardless
of the word processing program used. Most word processing
programs allow you to save a document as a text (.txt) fi le,
often referred to as a plain text fi le because of its simple,
plain appearance. The disadvantage of a text fi le is the loss of
formatting in a carefully designed print resume.
For instance, a resume written using an older version of
WordPerfect® but saved as a text fi le should open on a personal
computer that uses a current version of Microsoft® Word.
Using the text fi le, you ensure that anyone can open your fi le.
In addition, you can format to a limited degree by using the
following suggestions:
Use plain fonts (for example, large, open, “no tails” fonts such
◾
as Arial or Calibri) or consider Courier, a fi xed font with each
character taking up the same amount of space.
Use 10- to 14-point font size.
◾
Use one column, fl ush with the left margin; do not use side
◾
headings or tables.
Use capital letters for heading titles and other important
◾
information.
Avoid boldface, italics, underlining, and other characters not
◾
on the keyboard.
Use the space bar instead of tab keys.
◾
Use asterisks, dashes, or hyphens instead of regular bullets.
◾
Use wide margins set for 60 characters (1" left, 2.5" right).
◾
Use commas to indicate small breaks, semicolons to indicate breaks in a
◾
longer list, colons to set up a list, and periods to end sections.
Figure 11.2 on the next page shows Barbara’s chronological resume
formatted as an ASCII text fi le.
Scannable Resume
Scannable resumes are mailed as a print document, sent as an e-mail, or
posted online to be scanned electronically for keywords, signifi cant words
that are included in the job announcement. A keyword search compares
qualifi cations on the resume to qualifi cations the employer needs and
determines whether the resume has enough matches to warrant a closer
reading. If you are unsure whether a potential employer can read your word
processing program, send the fi le as a text fi le. If you are confi dent that the
employer will be able to read your word processing program, submit your
resume as a word processing document and format your resume for an
optical scanner.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Many people looking for a job use social
networking sites to connect with friends and
professionals who might assist in the job
hunt. One website, LinkedIn, helps people
stay in touch with other professionals. You
can create a proﬁ le that highlights your
skills the way a resume does, and you can
search for jobs. Employers can use LinkedIn
to view an applicant’s qualiﬁ cations. The
site also provides a way to get to know
other people in your area of expertise while
you are employed. You need to use good
judgment about what you post on the site:
do not divulge inappropriate personal or
incriminating information—including photos
and links.
Think Critically
Why is it important to use good judgment
with regard to the information you post on a
site such as LinkedIn?
262 | Chapter 11
Use the suggestions for formatting an ASCII text resume with these
differences:
You may use boldfacing, but avoid italics and underlining.
◾
If you print the resume, use dark black ink on white paper.
◾
If you mail the resume, do not staple or fold pages and use a large
◾
envelope so the resume lies fl at.
Online Resume
An online resume is posted on a website. Typically, it is one you create, one
your company or school hosts, or one sponsored by a web-based job-hunting
Figure 11.2 Electronic Resume as ACCII Text File
Employment Communication | 263
service such as Monster Career Tools or CareerOneStop. Online job-hunting
services provide instructions for posting web-based resumes.
Another option is to design your own website from which you post your
resume and set up links to your portfolio, references, or professional
organizations. Be aware, however, that employers are not likely to visit your
personal website for initial screening. Send your resume—print, e-mail, or
scannable—and note that you have a website with additional information.
Many job hunters post their resumes on websites that contain not only
their resume, but also links to work samples. These websites are sometimes
known as electronic portfolios. Employers can view your resume and work
samples quickly and do not need to wait for you to send them. Most word
processing software allows you to create such portfolios by converting your
text to HTML, the language used to create web pages.
STOP AND THINK
Describe the different ways to send an electronic resume. Under what
circumstances would you convert a resume to a text file?
COMPOSING RESUMES
After you have analyzed your audience and assessed your strengths as an
employee, you are ready to compose the parts of your resume. Writing a
resume means working through drafts until you have written a professional
document with no errors.
Word Choice
When writing a resume, you want to present information in as few words
as possible. The word choice in a resume may be unlike anything you
have written before. A resume has its own grammar rules: Sentences and
paragraphs are not used because they take too long to read. Instead, resumes
are written in fragments, lists, descriptive phrases, and verbs. Resume
language is both general and specifi c, with carefully chosen details.
Nouns or Nouns + Descriptive Phrases
For naming Activities, Honors, Achievements, and Awards, use a list of nouns
or nouns+descriptive phrases.
ACTIVITIES: Key Club treasurer, Girl Scout leader, member Lions Club
AFFILIATIONS: Key Club, Girl Scouts, Lions Club
SKILLS:
Knowledge of both Windows and Macintosh environments
◾
Ability to program in a variety of languages, including Lotus Notes, C
◾
11,
and Java
Experience installing and confi guring networks
◾
Have you ever written a
perfect paper—an essay, a
letter, a short report? Is it
possible to write something
with no errors? Explain.
Warm Up
264 | Chapter 11
Verb + What
Verb+what is a quick, effective phrase to describe skills, qualifi cations, and
work experience. Use action verbs to stress what you can do for an employer.
Performance is more impressive than qualifi cations. The greater the variety
of verbs, the more dynamic and effective the resume. Add details to the
phrase to show more specifi c information.
Make sure the lists are consistent in tense: present tense for jobs you
currently hold and past tense for jobs you no longer hold. If you have (or
had) a title, include the title before your list of duties followed by a colon.
Also organize your list of duties in order of importance.
Present Tense Verbs Describes Jobs You Currently Hold
encode data
install equipment
wait tables
provide child
care
refurbish
equipment
manage offi ce
staff
Past Tense Verbs Describes Jobs You No Longer Hold
sold
merchandise
analyzed data
assisted customers
stocked
groceries
fi led reports
evaluated
procedures
Job Titles Before Duties
Cashier: Operated register, greeted customers, and took orders
Shift Manager: Supervised 15 workers, enforced safety measures, and
handled payroll
Table 11.2 shows other action verbs you may want to consider.
Grant, age 28, spent two years in the state penitentiary for shoplifting
when he was 19 years old. Since that time, he attended classes, obtaining
an associate degree in accounting, and spent three years in the U.S. Army.
He now has a family and is an involved and respected member of his
community.
Grant is applying for a job with D & J Accounting. The application asks if he
has ever been convicted of a crime. Since his shoplifting offense, Grant has
been a law-abiding citizen.
Think Critically
What are the possible consequences if Grant does not reveal the shoplifting
incident? What are the possible consequences if he does? What should he do?
Communication
Dilemma
Employment Communication | 265
Specific Language
Think of your resume as the fi rst piece of evidence a potential employer sees
regarding your unique skills. As evidence, it should come with suffi cient
proof of your credentials and accomplishments. The proof comes in those
specifi c, quantifi able bits of information you choose to use on your resume.
What you choose to include in these roughly 160 to 350 words (for a one-
page resume) proves your qualifi cations and tailors your resume to the skills
your employer needs.
✓ Specifi c Language
✗ Vague Language
Objective: To work as a loan offi cer
in a local credit union (expresses
a particular position in a particular
banking institution)
Objective: To work as a
professional in a modern
banking environment
Objective: To work part-time as a
historical tour guide for a seventeenth-
century governor’s palace (responds
specifi cally to the job announcement)
Objective: To obtain a summer
part-time position
Ensured compliance with EPA and
OSHA regulations (responds to query for
experience with EPA and OSHA)
Enforced safety regulations
Met all 10 performance standards from
2001–2010 (specifi es how many and when)
Consistently met performance
standards
Parallel Structure
When setting up headings, providing information, or creating lists for
resumes, use parallel structure (use of the grammatical structure already
in place). Parallel structure provides consistency, enabling your reader to
anticipate your structure.
This means if you begin your employment history with a job title, you list
the job title fi rst with every job. If you begin your employment history with
the name of the company and the job title second, you list the company
name fi rst and the job title second for each job.
accomplished
coordinated
generated
reduced
achieved
counseled
identified
revised
administered
designed
increased
saved
attained
developed
investigated
solved
budgeted
devised
maintained
streamlined
built
established
mentored
strengthened
calculated
evaluated
organized
taught
completed
formulated
planned
trained
contributed
fulfilled
promoted
wrote
Table 11.2
266 | Chapter 11
Descriptions also should be written in parallel structure.
✓ Parallel
Answered calls from fi eld
technicians, created service
bulletins, analyzed warranty
claims, authorized warranty
repairs and modifi cations,
communicated with design
engineers.
✗ Nonparallel
I answered calls from fi eld technicians.
Was responsible for service bulletins.
Duties included warranty claims
analysis and warranty authorization
numbers for specifi c repairs and
modifi cations. Close communication
with design engineers is ongoing.
Keywords for Scannable Resumes
When selecting keywords for a scannable resume, the rules of resume
writing change. The print resume relies on verbs to demonstrate skills
performed. The scannable resume, on the other hand, relies on nouns that
list skills, qualifi cations, and job titles in a separate heading, Keywords.
Following are some examples of keywords.
Skills: C11 programming, graphic design, marketing, statistical analysis,
training, database management, communication, problem solving,
management, organization, attention to detail
Job titles: Computer specialist, manager, supervisor, director, administrative
assistant, chair, facilitator, nurse’s aid, machinist, research assistant
Qualifi cations: Membership in professional organizations, licenses,
certifi cations, degrees, awards
Using several synonyms for one word increases the chances that your
keywords will match those of your employer. For example, because the
words hair stylist and cosmetologist are synonyms, you should include
both terms when your resume will be scanned. The scanning programs
are very literal, though. For example, if the company asks for experience
with Microsoft Offi ce Suite, do not write “profi cient in Word, Excel, and
PowerPoint.” Those terms may not match.
A machine can scan a three-page resume as quickly as a one-page resume.
Thus, when in doubt, include more rather than less information when
preparing a scannable resume. Print resumes save time for the reader by
restricting length and using concise wording. Scannable resumes are thorough.
Punctuation
Because resumes do not contain complete sentences, applying traditional
punctuation rules is diffi cult. If one piece of information ends naturally on a
single line, you may choose not to put an end mark there. For other marks of
punctuation:
Use periods to break up large blocks of text or to indicate a change in
◾
information.
Use colons to introduce lists.
◾
Use commas to separate simple lists of three or more items.
◾
Use semicolons to separate complex lists (lists that already contain
◾
commas) of three or more items.
Complete the activity Finding
Famous Parallel Statements
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 11;
then click Data Files.
Employment Communication | 267
Refer to the models in this chapter to see how the resumes are punctuated.
Whatever system you adopt, use consistent punctuation throughout your
resume.
STOP AND THINK
What is the hardest part of writing a resume? Why? How does the wording of an
essay differ from that of a resume? How does a traditional print resume differ
from a scannable resume? What are the advantages of an electronic resume?
COMPOSING EMPLOYMENT LETTERS
Employment letters give you another opportunity to present your skills. Unlike
the resume, these letters are written in traditional paragraphs and complete
sentences, also showing the employer how well you write. Three types of
employment letters are (1) cover letters to accompany the resume and to
highlight the applicant’s strengths; (2) follow-up letters to thank the employer
for the interview; (3) and in some cases, resignation letters to announce a
person’s decision to leave a company. On occasion, e-mail correspondence
takes the place of an employment letter.
Cover Letter
A cover letter is a sales letter. It is a persuasive letter that sells you as the
product or service. As stated in Chapter 5, sales letters are composed of the
hook, the sell, and the motivation to action. A cover letter is composed of
an opening (an attention-getter or a hook), a summary of qualifi cations (the
proof or sell), and a request for an interview (motivation to action).
Opening
The fi rst paragraph should grab the reader’s attention by:
1. Stating your interest in the job.
2. Describing your qualifi cations in a way that sets you apart from other
applicants.
3. Explaining how you found out about the job.
4. Quickly summarizing your major qualifi cations for the job.
Most cover letters are solicited; that is, they are requested or advertised.
With solicited positions, refer to the advertisement in the opening sentence.
Sometimes, however, you may submit an unsolicited letter. In this case,
you are looking for employment with an organization that has not solicited
or advertised a vacancy. Not all companies advertise their jobs, and you do
not know whether there is an opening unless you ask. Your skills may be in
such demand that a company creates a position for you. Writing an opening
to an unsolicited letter is more of a challenge; you must generate interest
immediately. Name-dropping may stimulate interest, or a dynamic opening
can emphasize your advantages.
Look closely at the cover
letter in Figure 11.3
(page 270) that Matt wrote to
accompany his resume. How
is this cover letter like a sales
letter?
Warm Up
268 | Chapter 11
Solicited Letter Opening
(refers to advertisement in the
opening sentence)
A radiography degree and three
years’ experience at Unity
Systems Health Care qualify
me for the radiography position
you advertised recently on Tri-
Point Hospital’s web page of job
openings.
Unsolicited Letter Opening
(generates interest with name
dropping and a unique background)
Dr. Yu Zeng suggested that I contact
you about an opening in your
radiology department.
With degrees and certifi cations in
medical sonography, radiography,
echocardiography, and computed
tomography/magnetic resonance
imaging, think how valuable my
services would be to a small rural
hospital with a limited staff. My
bedside manner is impressive, and
I am available for employment.
Summary of Qualifications
The second and third paragraphs justify your claim that you can work for the
company by proving your credentials. The letter is not meant to be a copy of
your resume. The letter should emphasize qualifi cations but not repeat the
resume word for word. To provide proof that you can perform the job:
1. Describe your education.
2. Describe appropriate work experience.
3. Describe related skills.
4. Explain some of your abilities that you do not mention in your resume.
If you are a recent graduate, your education paragraph will come immediately
after your opening paragraph. It will specify your degree and major course of
study. It may include relevant courses, accomplishments, and areas of expertise.
If you have been in the work force for several years, your work experience
sjlocke/iStockphoto.com
Employment Communication | 269
will come immediately after the opening paragraph and describe relevant
jobs and major work-related accomplishments. In the letter, you also have the
opportunity to add information about your character, your work habits, your
people skills, and any other information you believe is relevant to the job.
Request for Interview
The last paragraph in the cover letter motivates the reader to action by asking
for an interview and making it convenient to contact you. Make sure you:
1. Refer to the enclosed resume.
2. Ask for an interview.
3. Tell how and when you can be reached by including your phone
number(s) and/or e-mail address.
When composing your cover letter, vary your sentence structure. Although it is
easy to begin every sentence with I when writing about yourself, try to begin
some sentences with other words. For variety, consider beginning sentences
with prepositional phrases, introductory clauses, and transitional words.
On the next page, Figure 11.3 shows a cover letter that Matt wrote to Hailey
O’Dell, personnel director at Monarch Electronic Industries. Matt’s letter
gets his reader’s attention by expressing interest in the job opening and
stating his desire to move back to Arkansas. Then Matt uses two paragraphs
to tell how his education and work experience make him a good match for
Monarch. In the last two paragraphs, Matt reveals special knowledge of
and interest in the company and asks for an interview. Note the variety of
sentences in Matt’s letter.
Recently, the city manager of a small town was fired because he listed a
degree in city planning on his resume that he did not actually have. Being
two classes short of a college degree, he decided that that was as good as the
degree—except that it was not. It was a lie.
Many people have “skeletons in their closets”: a court conviction, a substance
abuse problem, or an unfinished degree. It is true that on paper, someone
with a conviction does not look as good as the person with a sterling record.
Someone without the proper degree does not look as good as the person
with the degree. However, the truth is better than any lie conceived to cover
up the “skeleton.” If a person cannot be trusted to complete employment
data honestly, then he or she is not a good risk for a company.
The bottom line is this: Falsifying employment data carries serious
consequences, such as immediate termination or prosecution. Some events
in the distant past may have little bearing on the job hunt and need not be
disclosed. However, if you are asked about something, do not lie.
Think Critically
What are the consequences for the city manager and the citizens of the town?
Focus on
Ethics
270 | Chapter 11
Figure 11.3 Cover Letter
E-mail Cover Message
If you are sending an electronic resume (as an attachment or as part of the
e-mail), you need a brief message to accompany the resume. Similar to the
cover letter, the e-mail message is briefer.
1. Declare your intention to apply for a particular job.
2. Tell how you are sending the resume and, if applicable, what program you
used to encode the resume.
3. Summarize your major qualifi cations in either a short paragraph or a list.
4. Ask for a meeting or an interview.
Employment Communication | 271
Follow-Up Letter
You send a follow-up letter, sometimes known as a thank-you letter,
immediately after a job interview. The follow-up letter should:
1. Thank the employer for the interview.
2. Remind the employer of something positive that was said or that took
place during the interview.
3. Explain why you are the best candidate for the job.
4. Express continuing interest in the job.
Sending a follow-up letter lets prospective employers know that you are still
interested and reminds them of your qualifi cations. It also is permissible to
send the follow-up message in an e-mail. With e-mail, make sure you use
an appropriate, specifi c subject line (for example, Follow-up to Interview).
On the next page, Figure 11.4 shows a follow-up letter that Matt wrote to
Ms. O’Dell after his interview.
Resignation Letter
Whatever your reason for leaving a job, writing a letter of resignation to
inform your current employer of your plans is a professional courtesy.
Your former employer may be contacted for a job reference. A well-written
letter of resignation that gives reasonable notice helps ensure goodwill with
your current employer. Later, when asked to provide a reference for you,
your employer will likely say positive things. To maintain the goodwill of
your employer, follow these guidelines:
Find out the company procedure and chain of command. Normally, you
◾
write the letter to your immediate supervisor, who would, in turn, pass
the letter up the chain of command. In a small work unit made up of
people with whom you work closely, use the supervisor’s fi rst name, as
you would in memos. In larger work units with a more formal structure,
use the supervisor’s last name.
Announce your intention to leave the company. Be clear that you are
◾
writing a letter of resignation.
State the last day you will work. Make sure that date provides enough
◾
notice according to company policy and your knowledge of company
operations.
Use courteous language. Use your manners (
◾
please and thank you)
and qualifying words (might, probably, most likely, and seems) if
necessary.
Compliment your employer and the company. Thank your supervisor for
◾
any opportunities or special help he or she provided. If you are leaving
because you are dissatisfi ed with the work environment, fi nd something
positive to say about the organization, even if it is brief.
Offer to help the company prepare for your absence. You can offer to train
◾
your replacement or complete work projects in advance.
Volunteer a reason for leaving only if you feel comfortable doing so. If
◾
the employer/employee relationship is strained, you may omit the reason
272 | Chapter 11
or provide a simple one, such as the desire to pursue other interests.
When there is a real problem at work, such as sexual harassment or
discrimination, think carefully about explaining the reason.
Close with something positive. Thank your employer once more or say
◾
something positive about your upcoming plans.
Montel wrote the letter in Figure 11.5 to Donald Shappel, the director of
Charter Disability Services, resigning the position he has held for nine years.
Montel has enjoyed a close working relationship with his supervisor.
Figure 11.4 Follow-up Letter
Employment Communication | 273
Figure 11.5 Letter of Resignation
STOP AND THINK
What is the purpose of a cover letter and a follow-up letter? Why should you
give as much notice as possible in a letter of resignation?
274 | Chapter 11
Chapter 11
Review
SUMMARY
1. You get started on employment communication by assessing your
strengths, researching the prospective employer, choosing your
references, and understanding your audience.
2. For a resume to stand out, it should look symmetrical, include ample
white space, and use an easy-to-read font. Basic headings include
Identifi cation, Education, and Work Experience. Optional headings
enhance the resume and tailor it to the job description. Information is
organized in reverse chronological order and priority order.
3. Resumes are organized as chronological resumes or functional
resumes. They also may be formatted as electronic resumes.
4. Resumes are written using parallel phrases and lists. Sentences and
paragraphs are not used because they take too long to read.
5. Three types of letters and employment-related e-mail are cover letters/
messages, follow-up letters/messages, and resignation letters.
Checklist
Are all documents (resume, cover letter, follow-up letter, and e-mail) free
◾
from grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors?
Are all documents reader-centered rather than writer-centered?
◾
Have I addressed the job qualifi cations (either the qualifi cations listed in
◾
an employment ad or the qualifi cations I think the job requires)?
Have I chosen the most effective resume for my situation: chronological,
◾
functional, or electronic?
Is my writing organized to refl ect my strengths?
◾
Does the fi rst sentence in my cover letter/message grab the reader’s attention?
◾
Does my cover letter/message explain how I possess the necessary skills
◾
for the job and refer to any skills mentioned in the ad or job description?
Did I give enough information so that I could be reached easily?
◾
Is the tone in my cover letter/message and follow-up letter/message positive
◾
and polite?
Have I addressed my communication to the proper person?
◾
Have I complimented the supervisor and the company in my letter of
◾
resignation?
Employment Communication | 275
Build Your Foundation
1. What kind of information is left out of each of the following resume excerpts?
a. Identification
Maria Valencia
589 Mohican Avenue
Providence, RI
c. Education
Danville Technical College
Associate in Applied Science
GPA: 3.5/4.0
b. Experience
Denton’s Sport Shop, York, NE
Ordered inventory
Kept business ledger
Calculated payroll
d. Major Resume Headings
Work Experience
Skills
Volunteer Work
Professional Affiliations
2. For each situation, decide whether a chronological or functional resume
is appropriate. Suggest possible sections/headings for each situation.
a. Boota worked for eight years as a dental hygienist. She stopped
work for ten years while her children were small. She worked part-
time in a day care center for three of those years and volunteered at
her children’s schools. She also kept the accounting ledger for her
husband’s restaurant. Now at 38, she has just completed an associate
degree in accounting with a GPA of 3.9.
b. Marcine just graduated with a degree in occupational therapy. Before
she went to school, she worked as a carpenter’s helper.
c. Lyle retired from the Air Force two years ago and has taken a few
marketing courses. As a teenager and young adult, he worked in his
father’s printing company. He is applying to be a sales representative
for a publishing company.
3. For Francisco’s resume, write the Work Experience section for the
following three jobs. They span approximately fi ve years. Make up any
information that is missing.
a. Francisco worked at Oleander Juice Bar. He took orders for and
prepared juice drinks. He also operated the cash register and balanced
the register each night. He became the crew manager after six months.
b. Francisco worked for Complete Lawn Care. He mowed lawns for
several businesses and residences. Part of his job included trimming
bushes and raking leaves. He learned how to plant fl owers and bushes
and to apply insecticides and fertilizer.
c. Working for Lucky Horse Stables, he groomed horses; cleaned out the
stalls; fed, walked, and trained horses; and provided them with basic
medical care.
4. Help the following individuals word their job objective statements.
a. Lara wants to work as a nurse practitioner. She likes children and has
experience working in a children’s hospital.
b. Henri has credentials in electronics and theater and is currently
enrolled in an audio engineer program. He wants to work the sound
system for musical groups.
c. Molly’s goal is to work with children with autism. She is applying to a
highly renowned educational center.
276 | Chapter 11
5. Revise the following descriptions of work history to reduce the number
of words. Make sure you use parallel structure.
a. HVAC Technician: I installed air conditioning systems, including running
the duct work and running and connecting electrical and gas supply
lines. Assisted in construction of company storage facility. We were
offered contracts to replace insulation on hurricane-damaged homes.
b. Recording Engineer: To edit and master recordings in CD-R media.
Work to design package and labeling CDs. Produce and sell CDs at
public concerts. Operated PA and computerized lighting systems for
Little Theater Productions.
c. Music Director: I directed choir during rehearsals and performances
and selected music for weekly performances for the choir. Also, I
ordered music from companies. When there was a special occasion,
I put together a cantata of musical selections. The organ and piano—
I played them, too, and sometimes handbells. Oh, and I sang for
weddings.
6. Analyze your strengths as an employee. Select a partner in your class
with whom to share employee strengths. How do your strengths differ?
Give each other suggestions for which strengths to highlight in a resume
or cover letter.
7. In groups of four, write a Work Experience section for the entire group
using the strategies in the chapter. Include at least one job each member
has held—whether full- or part-time.
8. Below is an ad for an administrative assistant. Following the ad is a draft
of a cover letter for the position. Decide whether the excerpt addresses
every qualifi cation in the advertisement. What, if anything, is left out?
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT High-energy, detail-oriented team player for our Greenville
office to learn many office responsibilities. Prefer knowledge of Microsoft Office. Send
resume to . . .
As a graduate of Taggart Technical Institute, I have gained skills in word
processing. In particular, I have worked extensively with all aspects of
Microsoft® Offi ce.
I also am familiar with the most up-to-date offi ce management systems.
A part-time job with Apex Industries gave me the opportunity to work
in an offi ce with an effi cient offi ce manager. From the offi ce manager, I
learned important tips about fi ling, turning out timely correspondence,
and scheduling appointments.
9. The following sentences from cover letters do not provide the details that
prove the skill or qualifi cation listed. What information should be added?
a. I have educational experience with personal computers and basic
programming.
b. I have worked in my family’s construction business for the past seven
years, so I have extensive knowledge of how a building should be put
together. I have worked on every phase of a job.
c. I am a 2010 graduate of Vancouver Community College with an
associate degree in medical offi ce technology. Throughout my college
career, I gained many skills.
Employment Communication | 277
10. Zeno is preparing to apply for a construction job. On his worksheet, he
has listed the following seven people as possible references. Read the
descriptions and help him decide which references to use.
Jack Garriet: Zeno’s high school drafting teacher
◾
Rosie Montero: Zeno’s neighbor and an administrative assistant at the
◾
high school
Dr. Gretchen Walker: head of local Habitat for Humanity, for which
◾
Zeno has volunteered (Habitat for Humanity helps build and fi nance
houses for people who could not otherwise afford them.)
Rochelle Currier: Zeno’s neighbor and an architect; she supervised a
◾
high school construction project on which Zeno worked
Roy Janak: manager of Kemp Building Supplies; sold supplies to Zeno
◾
Meredith McDougan: Zeno’s 12th-grade English teacher
◾
Chevron Tucker: Zeno’s uncle and a member of the clergy
◾
11. Interview a parent or friend who has a job that he or she likes. Find out
what kind of resume this person wrote, what process was used by the
hiring company, and what the interview was like. Has resume writing
changed since this person was hired? Share your fi ndings with the class.
Your Turn
12. Pretend you have just completed the degree (with a high GPA) you have
always wanted. Create a resume and cover letter to apply for your dream
job.
13. Write a functional resume highlighting your skills for a job in your fi eld.
Use Juanita’s resume as a model. Write a cover letter to accompany it.
14. Rewrite the resume you wrote for item 12 or 13 as an electronic resume.
Choose between a text fi le resume or a scannable resume.
15. Write a letter of resignation for a job you have had for fi ve years.
16. Write a resume and cover letter for someone who has been in the work
force at least fi ve years. Take notes to assess this person’s strengths using
the questions at the beginning of the chapter. Ask the employee to give
you a description of a job he or she would like to have along with a job
objective. Does this person need a chronological or a functional resume?
Community Connection
17. Visit your local Employment Security Commission to learn about the
local job market and how applicants fi nd and apply for jobs. What
jobs are available? How does an applicant apply for a job? What is the
unemployment rate? What suggestions do the case workers have for
applicants? Prepare a short report for the class about what you learn.
18. Visit or call your college’s placement center or a head-hunting agency.
Find out what services are offered and how to register for them. Is there
a fee? Do services come with a guarantee? Is there an online job site?
Share what you learn with the class in a short oral report.
278 | Chapter 12
Presentations
WRITE TO LEARN
Recall speakers whose performances you have enjoyed. For instance, you
may have had an instructor who held your attention from the moment you
entered the classroom. Perhaps you appreciated a speaker at a club meeting
or special event. What made these speakers effective communicators? List
the qualities and actions that helped these speakers to be effective. For
instance, consider these questions: What did the speaker do to get your
attention at the beginning? What did the speaker provide as visual support
so you could better understand the message?
Chapter
Goals
Understand audience and formality
◾
Plan for audience, topic, graphic aids,
◾
location, time, and stage fright
Determine how to organize and compose
◾
presentations
Prepare outline, notes, and appearance
◾
Rehearse for a presentation
◾
Present with confidence
◾
Organize a group presentation
◾
Terms
adrenaline, p. 287
◾
anecdote, p. 288
◾
auditory, p. 294
◾
direct approach, p. 287
◾
external audiences, p. 281
◾
feedback, p. 294
◾
formal presentations, p. 281
◾
indirect approach, p. 288
◾
informal presentations,
◾
p. 281
internal audiences, p. 281
◾
rhetorical question, p. 288
◾
Focus on Presentations
Read the sample presentation slide on the next page and answer these
questions:
Who is the intended
•
audience?
What does the title contribute to the slide?
•
Why is the information in the notes not covered in the slide?
•
Does the slide need animation? Why or why not?
•
What If?
The writer had intended to deliver the presentation only online?
•
Readers were unfamiliar with America’s economic situation?
•
All audience members were experts in accounting?
•
Presentations | 279
Sample Presentation Graphics
From The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act: Saving and Creating Jobs and Reforming Education, United States.
Dept. of Education. Web. 3 Apr. 2009.
Guiding Principles
The overall goals for stimulating the economy in the short term and for investing wisely; funds
are used to improve schools, raise achievement, drive reforms, and produce better results for
children and young people for the long-term health of our nation
Four principles guide the distribution and use of ARRA funds:
Spend funds quickly to save and create jobs. ARRA funds will be distributed quickly to states,
local educational agencies, and other entities to avert layoffs, create and save jobs, and improve
student achievement. In turn, states and LEAs are urged to move rapidly to develop plans for
using funds that are consistent with the law’s reporting and accountability requirements and to
begin spending funds promptly to help drive the nation’s economic recovery.
Ensure transparency, reporting, and accountability. To prevent fraud and abuse, support the
most effective uses of ARRA funds, and measure and track results accurately, recipients must
publicly report how funds are used. Due to the unprecedented scope and importance of this in-
vestment, ARRA funds are subject to additional and more rigorous reporting requirements than
what normally apply to grant recipients.
Invest one-time ARRA funds thoughtfully to minimize the “funding cliff.” ARRA represents
a historic infusion of funds that is expected to be temporary. Depending on the program, these
funds are available for only two to three years. These funds should be invested in ways that do
not result in unsustainable continuing commitments after the funding expires.
Enhance student achievement through school improvement and reform. Used this way, these
funds close the achievement gap and help students from all backgrounds achieve high standards.
Guiding Principles
280 | Chapter 12
Writing@Work
Elizabeth K. Tripodi is an
attorney in Washington, D.C.
She represents primarily
shareholders of publicly
traded companies in lawsuits
against the company when there has been fraud.
For Elizabeth, a successful presentation is multifaceted:
“A good presentation immediately provides an overview of
where the presentation is going. It involves some sort of
visual aid as well so that a listener is engaged both aurally
and visually. Finally, I think anecdotes always make a
presentation more interesting.”
When preparing a presentation, Elizabeth meticulously
researches and outlines her material. “Research is such a key element, especially
when preparing for a hearing before a judge. You need to be prepared to address
any and all of the judge’s concerns. After researching, I outline my presentation.
Following an outline ensures that I’m clear, concise, and that my audience can
follow my reasoning.”
“After outlining, it’s practice, practice, practice,” says Elizabeth. “I like to start
rehearsing in a room by myself, getting comfortable with the material and my
arguments. It also helps me to hear my own voice,” she notes. “I often ask other
attorneys to pretend they are the judge hearing my case so that I can practice
performing well under pressure and reacting to various scenarios.”
Elizabeth knows that delivering a great presentation depends in part on
connecting with your audience. “If I know what the audience expects, I will tailor
my presentation to them. In addition, I think eye contact with your audience is
essential. Be comfortable with your material and try not to read from a script.
Finally, make sure your presentation style suits your personality. For me, it’s
about seeming professional, friendly, and intelligent.”
Think Critically
1. Who are Elizabeth’s audiences in the courtroom?
2. What can Elizabeth learn by practicing in front of someone who role-plays
the judge? What does she risk if she does not practice this way?
Printed with permission of Elizabeth Tripodi
Courtesy of Elizabeth Tripodi
Presentations | 281
GETTING STARTED ON PRESENTATIONS
The success with which you handle oral reporting may determine whether
you are successful in your profession. You may have the best new product
idea for your company. However, for your idea to become a reality, you must
communicate it to the management team and convince the team members
to try the product. This chapter explains how to plan, organize, compose,
prepare, rehearse, and present oral reports effectively.
The higher up the corporate ladder you move, the more likely you are to
give oral presentations. The audience, formality, and purpose may vary.
For instance, you may give presentations to internal audiences (listeners
in the presenter’s organization). Your audience may be colleagues above
or below you in the organizational hierarchy—or both. You also may
give presentations to external audiences (listeners outside the speaker’s
organization), such as suppliers, vendors, and customers.
Some oral presentations will be as informal as an impromptu gathering
where you answer questions. These spontaneous informal presentations
occur without preparation or rehearsal. Instead, you use your experience
and knowledge to provide insight. Listeners will expect thought and
clarity, but they will not expect you to recall precise details.
Other presentations will be elaborate and carefully prepared
sessions. These formal presentations, planned in advance and
rehearsed, are usually scheduled for an offi ce, an auditorium,
or a conference room. These locations may include tools for
the presenter’s use—ranging from a podium and microphone,
to a whiteboard, to more high-tech aids such as SMART
Board™ interactive whiteboards and LCD projectors. Formal
presentations often include printed material for distribution,
posters, product samples or models, and multimedia slides.
During your career, you may be asked to present solutions
to problems; results of investigations; policies or procedures;
progress on projects; benefi ts of ideas, products, or services; or
training seminars.
What presentations or public
speaking do you expect to do
in your career?
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER/LISTENER
Any person or employee needing informa-
tion delivered verbally, often with graphic
aids to enhance the message.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Providing clear information targeted to the
audience’s needs and delivered appropriately
for the situation.
Shelton Corbett and Jody Kolema were assigned to make a presentation
before their company’s board of directors on new licensing guidelines.
Because of other projects taking longer than expected, Shelton and Jody are
behind schedule in planning their presentation. As they begin rehearsing
with slides, Jody realizes that Shelton has incorporated complete passages as
well as a visual aid from another company’s website.
Think Critically
What action, if any, should Jody take?
Communication
Dilemma
282 | Chapter 12
PLANNING
The planning stage is essential in the creation of presentations. This is the
stage in which you analyze your audience, develop a topic, create effective
graphic aids, assess the location, plan your time, and anticipate stage fright.
Audience
Analyzing your audience is as important in oral reports as it is in written
reports. You need to know your listeners in order to connect with them.
Begin your audience analysis by asking why you are making the presentation
and what you want to achieve. You must understand the goal if you want
to reach it. For instance, Will’s manager asked him to comment on a new
pillow display. Will explained at length how he thought the pillows were too
soft when, in fact, all the manager wanted to know was whether the display
was sturdy and safe. If Will had understood that his manager was asking
about the staging of the display, Will could have answered appropriately.
Once your purpose is clear, try answering the following questions:
Who is the audience—customers? clients? technical experts? managers?
◾
sales staff? product developers?
What is the audience’s role? How will the audience use the information?
◾
Will the audience be a single person, a small group, or a large group?
◾
If the audience is a group, is that group made up of the same types or
◾
roles (all engineers or all sales staff) or is it diverse?
Is the audience more comfortable with words or with numbers and
◾
statistics?
What impresses the audience?
◾
What are the audience’s expectations?
◾
Will the audience use the information themselves or pass it along to others?
◾
How much, if anything, does the audience already know about the topic?
◾
Is the audience familiar with the jargon related to this topic? Or will you
◾
need to defi ne and explain technical aspects of the presentation?
How comfortable is the audience with technology? Does the audience
◾
expect multimedia in the presentation?
What history does the audience have with this topic? Is the audience likely
◾
to come with an approving, neutral, or hostile attitude?
The better you know your audience, the more effective you can be in
meeting the audience’s needs and achieving your purpose.
STOP AND THINK
What are some of the differences between informal and formal presentations?
Think about your public
speaking experiences.
Perhaps you have given a
report in class or led a club
meeting. If you have not had
many speaking opportunities,
imagine what the experience
would be like. Write a
description of one challenge
and one victory of speaking.
Then list what you like and
dislike about public speaking
and share your list with the
class.
Warm Up
Presentations | 283
Topic
Sometimes speakers choose their own topics. However, when asked to
speak at work (and in school), you often are assigned a topic. In business,
managers often ask employees to prepare a written document such as
a progress report, a solution to a problem, or an incident report. After
submitting the written report, the employee may be asked to make an oral
presentation. For example, Edith Frost, a machinist at Tarboro Machine
Corporation, wrote a report that suggested three new safety measures for all
machine operators. She submitted the report to the plant safety offi cer and
the vice president. Edith’s supervisor then asked her to present her plan at
the next managers’ meeting.
Graphic Aids
Research suggests that an audience takes in less than 25 percent of
what a speaker says. One way to increase your audience’s comprehension
is by using graphic aids. Graphic aids clarify ideas and highlight
important information, allowing audiences to both see and hear the
message.
Guidelines for Choosing What to Illustrate
When you think of adding graphic aids, you must decide what to illustrate.
Use these questions to help you:
What information is most important?
◾
What data is most complex or most diffi cult to understand?
◾
What concepts, statistics, or fi gures are particularly important?
◾
NejroN/iStockphoto.com
284 | Chapter 12
Once you answer those questions, you will have selected the ideas your
audience needs to understand and, as a result, determined what ideas to
illustrate. The next question is how best to illustrate a particular idea.
Types of Graphic Aids
Graphic aids can include photographs, line drawings, charts, tables,
objects, or multimedia. For instance, a presenter discussing environmental
hazards might use a fl ip chart to diagram the amount of chemicals found in
groundwater. A student speaking to her classmates about erroneous ideas
associated with cerebral palsy brought her brother, a police detective with
cerebral palsy, to class as a graphic aid.
The various types of graphic aids—fl ip charts, transparencies, slides,
multimedia, dry erase boards, handouts, physical objects, and more—range
from simple and inexpensive to complex and costly. The time and cost of
development must be considered along with effectiveness when choosing
graphic aids. You do not want to spend a great deal of time or money to
create a working prototype of a new product when no action or decision
is expected. The time and expense could not be justifi ed for a simple
informational presentation. However, the investment might be reasonable
if production decisions were to be made.
In addition to time and cost, the location
(room or space) and audience size
are factors in determining the types of
graphics to use. For example, flip charts
and posters are appropriate for small
audiences in close spaces. Objects,
demonstrations, marker boards, and
transparencies may work well with a
medium-sized group as long as everyone
can see the graphic easily. In large meeting
facilities, multimedia presentations and fi lms
provide images that are large enough for
everyone to see.
Other factors to consider are artistic talent
(yours or your company’s) and equipment.
If your organization has a graphic arts
department that can produce quality graphs,
charts, photographs, fi lms, or electronic
aids, your only challenge may be selecting
the ideas you want illustrated and choosing
from your options. On the other hand,
you may have to rely on your own skills
and talent. When professionals are not
available, you may need to choose a simple
graphic aid because you can prepare it
easily. That is, you might create a simple
slide presentation instead of planning,
developing, and editing a fi lm that includes
sound and captions.
Photodisc/Getty Images
Presentations | 285
Guidelines for Creating Graphic Aids
When you develop graphics, keep your audience’s needs in mind. The
following guidelines will help you:
Make the graphic large enough for everyone to see easily—even people
◾
sitting in the back or the corners of the room.
Do not crowd numbers or images on a graphic aid.
◾
Remember that although attractive design counts, the message is more
◾
important.
Consider handouts for the audience, which they can refer to later.
◾
The following tips are for use with presentation software such as PowerPoint®:
Select landscape layout for your slides. It gives you longer lines for
◾
your text.
Give each slide a title or heading.
◾
Select a font that the audience can easily read from a distance, such as
◾
Times New Roman Bold or Arial Black.
Use serif fonts to improve readability. Because sans serif fonts present a
◾
cleaner, crisper image, use these fonts for titles of slides.
Choose a font size that is readable and that suggests the importance of
◾
elements on the slide. Generally, these sizes are appropriate:
• Titles: 24–36 points
• Other text: 18–24 points
• Source notes: 14–16 points
Capitalize the fi rst letter of important words in titles of slides. Words that
◾
are in all uppercase letters are diffi cult to read.
In bulleted lists, capitalize only the initial letter of the fi rst word (and, of
◾
course, proper nouns and proper adjectives).
Use the Notes section as a reminder of your next point; specifi c facts,
◾
fi gures, or quotations; cues when someone else will be advancing the
slide; or reminders such as “Make eye contact.”
If you have clip art or an image that supports the text on a slide, place it in
◾
the lower right corner.
Keep slides simple and uncluttered. Use phrases and keywords and limit
◾
the number of lines on a slide to six or fewer.
If you use transition effects between slides, make the effect meaningful.
◾
On your speaker’s notes pages, number the slides so you can quickly
◾
move to a particular slide when someone asks a question.
Do not preset timings in your slides. If you advance the slides manually,
◾
you can pace yourself rather than force your speech to fi t the predetermined
increment of time for each slide.
286 | Chapter 12
Location
Presenters also should plan for the presentation’s
location, which can be very important. For
example, if you will be making a union
presentation to a construction crew at an outdoor
job site, using a projector and screen probably is
not an option. If you are using a small conference
room to make a presentation about new soccer
league rules, demonstrating an illegal shot block
could be diffi cult.
In addition to their own needs regarding location,
presenters should plan for the audience’s needs
as well. Answer the following questions about
the location to prepare for your presentation.
Speaker’s Considerations
◾Is a speaker’s podium available? Is a
table or space available for handouts and
demonstration tools?
◾Will you be standing directly in front of the
audience, or will you be sitting in front of or
with the audience?
◾Is the stage elevated, or are you on the same
level as the audience?
◾How much space does the room encompass?
How well does sound carry? How loudly will
you need to speak in order to be heard?
If a microphone is needed, is it a wireless, podium, or handheld mic?
◾
Is audiovisual equipment installed, or must you bring your own?
◾
Is available equipment compatible with your software and hardware?
◾
Will you need passwords, keys, or codes to access the equipment,
◾
software, or Internet?
How much space do you have for moving around during your
◾
presentation?
Are people available to help you with equipment or to distribute handouts?
◾
Will someone introduce you, or will you introduce yourself?
◾
Audience’s Considerations
Is the location diffi cult to fi nd or reach? Are directions available?
◾
Is the location accessible for people with disabilities?
◾
If needed, are restrooms and refreshments available? Where?
◾
Will all members of the audience be able to see and hear?
◾
Photodisc/Getty Images
Presentations | 287
Is the location appropriate and comfortable (design, lighting, temperature)
◾
for the type of presentation?
Will the audience be seated or standing?
◾
Are the seats arranged appropriately for the group in attendance?
◾
Time
Presenters should plan to meet the time expectations of the audience. If you
are invited to present, the person who invites you should let you know how
much time you have to speak. If the host does not give you a time, ask.
Speakers who ignore audience expectations often lose the audience’s attention.
For example, when you go to class, you expect the class to be conducted
within the typical time period. How would students respond if their instructor
kept the class 30 minutes beyond the usual time? Listeners often respond by
fi dgeting, focusing on distractions, and sometimes even walking out. Keep
listeners’ attention by complying with the time frame you are given.
Also plan for the proper rate of speaking. Speak slowly when you share
diffi cult or complex ideas and pause after each major section or idea.
Nervous speakers tend to talk too fast and may frustrate the audience.
To avoid this problem, be aware of your pacing.
Stage Fright
You may think it odd that a textbook tells you to plan for stage fright when
most people want to avoid it. Yet stage fright is not something to eliminate;
it is energy you should use. Many professional speakers will tell you that you
cannot eliminate nervous reactions when speaking. Those reactions, they
say, are natural responses to stress. Instead of trying to suppress stage fright,
let it work for you. To harness this energy, you should:
Recognize and plan for how your body responds to anxiety.
◾
Anticipate excess
◾
adrenaline (a stimulant that excites and creates extra
energy) to give your introduction and important points extra emphasis.
STOP AND THINK
Would an audience of your classmates be more interested in how school policy
affects taxpayers or how school policy affects students? Explain.
ORGANIZING AND COMPOSING
When you are making a presentation, listeners cannot refer to a previous
page if they fi nd your ideas unclear or confusing. Therefore, you should
organize and compose your oral presentations for the listeners’ situation and
needs.
Selecting an Organizational Plan
For most presentations, you will probably use the direct approach. With the
direct approach, you state the main idea fi rst and then explain and support
Think of messages you have
prepared to give orally, such
as planning to ask someone
for a date or a favor. Under
what circumstances would it
be better to communicate an
important message in writing?
Under what circumstances
would it be better to
communicate an important
message in a formal oral
presentation? In a brief journal
entry, explain the diﬀ erences
and similarities between oral
and written composition.
Warm Up
288 | Chapter 12
that idea with details. Stating the main idea fi rst lets your listeners know
what your subject is, what points you will make, and how you will proceed.
On the other hand, if you know that your audience opposes the point that
you support or if you want to be especially persuasive, consider using the
indirect approach. With an indirect approach, you gradually build your
evidence, convincing the audience of your point, which you state at the end
of your presentation.
Previewing Organization
Regardless of organizational strategy, give the audience a preview so they
know what plan you are following. The preview is like a map showing a
driver where to turn and how far to go. Your preview explains the order of
your ideas. Here are two examples of typical preview statements:
This recommendation contains four major parts: review, staffi ng,
◾
operational policy, and production.
The SOP for student interns involves completing treatment plans, writing
◾
care instructions, and recording patient progress.
Composing the Introduction
Listeners typically recall the fi rst and last points they hear. Therefore, plan for a
strong introduction and conclusion. If you are uncertain how to introduce your
presentation, think as your audience might. What would get your attention? You
would want to know the topic; the points the speaker will support; and how this
issue affects you, the listener. Your introduction should announce the topic and
points you will make. In addition, you want to give the listeners something to
which they can relate—some connection. For example, an address by a woman
to her town’s commissioners began this way: “My friend Marquita died last
month. She should not have been in the path of a car going 45 miles per hour,
nor should any of your children, grandchildren, or neighbors. Our town must
protect its citizens by providing bicycle paths and enforcing helmet laws.”
Depending on your audience and purpose, try one of several introductions:
A direct quotation, usually from a well-known source
◾
A
◾
rhetorical question—a question designed to provoke thought; a question
for which the speaker expects no answer
A startling fact or statistic to grab a listener’s attention
◾
A statement you then disprove
◾
An
◾
anecdote, a humorous story
For example, if you were making a class presentation on the advantages of
modern medicine, you might begin this way:
If you were born in the United States in 1990, you had a life
expectancy of 75.4 years. On the other hand, people born in
1970 were expected to live only 70.8 years. According to these
statistics, you will outlive your mother and father by 4.6 years.
(United States: National Center for Health Statistics)
Presentations | 289
The startling fact that the audience’s generation is expected to live 4.6 years
longer than their parents’ should grab the listeners’ attention, particularly
because these statistics relate to the audience’s mortality.
Composing the Body
These guidelines will help you compose the body of an oral presentation:
Address people. Include the words
◾
you and your early and often.
Use words your audience will know. Defi ne unfamiliar terms.
◾
Use simpler sentences than you use when writing.
◾
Give listeners information they want or need and fully explain its
◾
relevance.
Emphasize main points. Because listeners take in only a small percentage
◾
of what they hear, repeat or restate essential ideas.
Announce transitions so the audience will not miss the connection from
◾
one point to the next.
Answer questions you think your audience is likely to ask.
◾
Stay within your time limit, meeting the audience’s expectations.
◾
Composing the Conclusion
Conclusions are important because they are the last point or topic the audience
will hear. Therefore, they require as much planning as introductions do. An
effective conclusion should hold the audience’s attention, summarize key
points, and call for action if requested.
STOP AND THINK
John wants to persuade his parents, who do not allow him to drive long
distances alone, to let him drive 55 miles to a basketball tournament. The
ideas that John plans to share with his parents are that (a) driving is the
least expensive and safest way to get to the tournament, (b) he has behaved
responsibly when given other opportunities, and (c) the bus does not travel to
the location. Place these ideas in the most effective order for John to present to
his parents.
PREPARING
After you complete the planning process, you need to prepare notes
and your image. Doing so will help ensure that you deliver an effective
presentation. Risks are huge if you neglect your preparation. Without
notes, you are left with only your memory, which sometimes fails under
stress. Without personal preparation, you may become preoccupied with
your clothing or hair, feeling greater frustration and losing ground with
the audience.
Think about your experiences
speaking both with and
without notes. If possible,
discuss these experiences
in small groups. Review the
beneﬁ ts of using notes and
problems you have had with
them.
Warm Up
290 | Chapter 12
Outlines and Notes
A practiced performance with an outline or notes yields an informal,
conversational style. Speakers may generate an outline using presentation
software such as Microsoft® PowerPoint® or develop an outline using a word
processor or a pen. With an outline or notes on index cards or paper, you
will be able to talk to your audience, not read to them.
To reach this point, you must organize your ideas effectively. If you were
writing a report, your next step would be to compose sentences, build
paragraphs, and create a document. For an oral presentation, however, you
should avoid extended writing. A complete paper with sentences and dense
paragraphs might encourage you to read the text rather than interact with
your audience. Or fearing that you might lose your place in all of that text,
you might avoid the text entirely and try to speak from memory.
An outline or notes should show each main point in your presentation. Under
each main point, list facts, fi gures, or quotations that support the point. For
precision and accuracy, do not trust your memory for such specifi c information
in front of an audience. For example, the outline in Figure 12.1 shows one
section of a report on progress for upgrading warehouse computers.
For the fi rst point of an outline or a note card, write a word or phrase that
will trigger your memory. Then go on to the next point of your speech.
Figure 12.1 Excerpt from a Presentation Outline
III.
Shipping and Receiving
Area 1
4 installations
Problems with location of wiring, Module MJD364
Area 2
Work completed; 3 installations
Approval of supervisor
Level 3
Work incomplete; 1 installation
Relocation of shelving unit, Module SDP21
Network concern
Scheduled December 9, 20—
Figure 12.2 Note Card for Oral Presentation
Presentations | 291
For each idea, prepare a point in an outline or on a note card similar to the
one in Figure 12.2. This card reminds the speaker that this section of the talk
is about tsunamis, the huge destructive waves that often occur in the Pacifi c
Ocean, striking places such as Sri Lanka, Japan, and Indonesia.
If you are developing computer slides for a presentation, most software
allows you to add notes. These notes reinforce the logical fl ow of the
discussion and highlight details such as statistics, quotations, and important
facts. For instance, PowerPoint® allows you to print handouts with two,
three, four, six, or nine slides per page, including space for notes.
Figure 12.3 on the following page shows a PowerPoint® handout. You can
use it to add notes for yourself, or you can give it to the audience so they can
write notes as you talk.
When preparing outlines or notes, remember these important points:
Do not write notes as complete sentences or long phrases. Even
◾
experienced speakers would be tempted to read these.
Prepare neat notes that are surrounded by adequate white space. Use large
◾
print so you can read the notes easily.
Structure notes uniformly: use numbered lists, bulleted lists, or outline
◾
form.
If you are using cards, write only one idea on each card. If you are using
◾
printed notes or outlines, use a large, easy-to-read serif font.
Number notes or cards from beginning to end. On note cards, place the
◾
card number in the upper right corner, as shown in Figure 12.2. Should
the cards become disorganized, you can sort them quickly.
Use outlines and notes to spark your memory. By glancing at the words,
◾
you will be able to look at your audience and deliver a portion of your
speech. Thus, you can converse with the audience using a polished
approach.
Personal Appearance
In addition to note cards and graphic aids, image has a big impact on the way
listeners receive a speaker’s message. You probably know how appearance
can affect communication in everyday situations. For example, think about
the way a salesperson might treat you if you are wearing worn jeans and
an old T-shirt. If you have not experienced this treatment yourself, you
likely have seen other people treated differently because of their clothing
or grooming.
When you select clothing for a presentation, consider the audience’s
expectations and the situation in which you will be speaking. For instance,
someone addressing city council would probably dress as formally as its
members do (in business attire). On the other hand, a speaker addressing
children at a youth center would dress more casually. Whatever you wear,
make sure you are comfortable in the outfi t. If you feel good about the way
you look, you will speak with confi dence.
If you have done everything you can to prepare for success, you are ready to
move to the rehearsal phase.
292 | Chapter 12
Figure 12.3 PowerPoint® Handout with Space for Notes
Permission by Kassie Bryan
STOP AND THINK
Would running shorts ever be appropriate dress for a presentation? Explain.
Lenses
3x zoom lens - focal length of 35–105 mm
Wide-angle lens - 14–50 mm
Telephoto lens - technically any lens longer than 50 mm
Image Size & Resolution
Pixels
Maximum Image Size
2.0 million
1,600 x 1,200
4.0 million
2,272 x 1,704
6.5 million
3,072 x 2,048
Commonly Used
Digital Cameras
Automatic cameras
the most common type of camera
Semiautomatic and manual cameras
the beginner’s camera
SLR digital cameras
the professional’s camera
SLR digital camera
Presentations | 293
Think about other skills you
have developed—sports,
music, or art. How much
practice is enough? What
does this tell you about oral
presentations? Respond to
these questions in a brief
journal entry.
Warm Up
REHEARSING
Expert presenters—even professional speakers—will say that you must
rehearse if you want to give a successful presentation. Practicing helps you
develop a conversational style. In fact, good speeches are a conversation
between speaker and audience, only slightly more polished than the
conversations you have with friends. Practice provides experience—
experience that soothes nerves and builds confi dence. After several
rehearsals (with adjustments each time), you will have a presentation with
which you are pleased and you can trust that your presentation will go well.
Using your note cards and graphic aids, you should practice your speech.
When you fi rst deliver the talk, you can identify parts you like and dislike.
Delivering the speech a second time, you can change what you do not like.
When you are comfortable with your delivery, you have rehearsed enough.
You have reached a conversational style.
Speakers practice their speeches in different ways, including using an audio
recorder, a mirror, a video camera, or a live audience. With experience, you
will decide which methods work best for you.
Using an Audio Recorder
After recording your presentation, take a break. Later, with the benefi t of
time and a fresh perspective, listen to your recording for the following:
Rate (how fast you talked)
◾
Volume (how loudly or softly you talked)
◾
Pronunciation (how distinct your words were)
◾
Infl ections (what your changes in pitch and tone were)
◾
Time (how much time you took to present your ideas)
◾
If you fi nd that you are talking too rapidly, something that often occurs
when people are nervous, adjust your pacing. Change your volume so
everyone can hear you but will not think you are yelling. Listen and correct
pronunciation, particularly of unfamiliar or challenging words. Avoid
speaking in monotone by varying your pitch and tone appropriately for the
message. Finally, check the length of your rehearsed presentation to ensure
that you are within your time limit.
Using a Mirror
Watch yourself in a mirror as you practice your presentation. Put yourself in
the role of the audience. What do you see that will enhance or detract from
the message? Check for:
Appropriate facial expressions. For example, do not grin when delivering sad
◾
news such as suicide rates. Likewise, do not fi nish your presentation without
having changed expressions.
Effective use of your body and hands. (Do your hand movements emphasize
◾
major points, or do they tend to distract your listener from the topic?)
294 | Chapter 12
Using a Video Camera
Do not review the presentation immediately. Wait until you have more
perspective—perhaps in an hour or the next day. When you do view the
recording, pretend to be your audience. Look for strengths as well as
weaknesses. With this auditory (sound) and visual information, check for
the following:
How you sound
◾
Whether your pacing works
◾
How you look
◾
What message you deliver
◾
Using a Live Audience
Ask a friend or family member to listen to you practice your presentation.
After delivering the speech, invite feedback—comments and suggestions to
help you improve. Try some of these questions:
What was my speech topic?
◾
What point did I try to prove?
◾
Did I make eye contact?
◾
Did I speak loudly enough?
◾
Did I tend to use verbal tics such as
◾
and, uh, um, or like?
Was my conclusion effective?
◾
Did I pronounce words correctly?
◾
STOP AND THINK
While an audio recorder provides useful feedback when you are rehearsing a
speech, what does it not tell you? In small groups, discuss your answers.
PRESENTING
Once you have thoroughly prepared, check the environment to ensure the
best situation and present with confi dence.
Checking the Room
Arrive early for your presentation. During that time, make sure listeners will
be comfortable and can see clearly and hear well. Consider seating, lighting,
temperature, equipment, and graphic aids.
Seating
Check the arrangement of chairs. Are they arranged so that you can
communicate effectively? For example, if you want group discussion, the
chairs should be placed so that people can see each other. Also, everyone in
the room should be able to see you (and any other presenters) easily.
Discuss these questions with
your classmates: Can oral
presentations be fun?
How can you make
presenting fun?
Warm Up
Presentations | 295
Lighting
Make sure your audience will have enough light to see and take notes. Correct
any glaring and overly bright spots. In a room that is lighted properly, your
audience can concentrate on your message.
Temperature
Check the temperature controls. People who are uncomfortably hot or
uncomfortably cold will not be good listeners.
Equipment and Graphic Aids
Check all equipment to make sure it is working properly and prepare for
problems. Remember Murphy’s Law: If something can go wrong, it will!
Make sure you have an extra bulb for the projector, markers, and anything
else you might need.
Before the event, determine how you will post or display your materials.
Consider visibility and access when arranging your graphic aids. Graphics
need to be located so that:
Everyone in the room can easily see them.
◾
You can point to the graphics as you talk.
◾
You can reach equipment to make adjustments, such as turning up the volume.
◾
The equipment has a power supply.
◾
Delivering the Message
Having prepared for the presentation, you are ready to enjoy talking with your
audience. Use the following pointers to help you deliver an effective message:
Use appropriate facial expressions.
◾
Maintain eye contact, which shows your interest and concern.
◾
Explain every graphic. Tell people exactly what you want them to understand.
◾
Post or distribute handouts only when you want the audience to use or
◾
read them. You may ask someone to distribute them for you.
Consult your notes, but do not read from them.
◾
Continue to talk even when something goes wrong. Recover as best you
◾
can, but go on. Do not call attention to a mistake by apologizing.
Remember that your audience wants you to succeed. Your audience’s
◾
desire for an effective presentation, along with the self-confi dence you
gained from being fully prepared, will ensure a positive experience.
Give your audience an opportunity to ask questions if the program and
◾
time allow. If you cannot answer a question, respond in a positive way:
“I’m sorry that I don’t have the answer to your question, but I’ll be happy
to check my sources and get back to you later this week.”
STOP AND THINK
Should you display your poster before you begin to speak? Is eye contact with
your audience desirable? Explain.
296 | Chapter 12
Imagine that three employees
walk into a meeting expecting
to make a sales presentation.
Each expects to make his
or her own presentation,
but when they arrive at the
meeting, all three are asked
to speak. How do you think
the presentation will go?
Warm Up
You live in an age when a great deal of business is being conducted globally.
That means that at some point in your career, you may have an opportunity
to attend a meeting in Japan, give a presentation in Australia, or create and
present a training course via a videoconference in Brazil.
Because more business is being conducted globally, knowing the proper
methods for presentations across cultures is extremely important. Beginning
with the presentation planning stage, you must be aware of how cultural
practices and expectations of the audience are different from your own.
Research the audience’s culture and plan for differences to ensure that your
presentation is well received.
For example, while presenting to an international audience, you should be
aware of gestures that are not universal. In Greece, nodding your head up
and down means “no,” not “yes.” In Australia, a “thumbs-up” gesture is
considered inappropriate.
You also should research the formality of the culture. Jokes are not appropriate
for some audiences. Dressing formally makes other audiences uncomfortable.
No matter what cultural differences you face, the most important rule to
remember is to respect those differences.
Think Critically
What are some cultural differences evident in your community? How
does being aware of them give you the opportunity to be a more effective
communicator?
Focus on
Ethics
ORGANIZING A GROUP PRESENTATION
Presenting with others requires special consideration. Collaboration provides
many opportunities to share diverse perspectives and expertise. However,
group presentations require careful planning if they are to be effective.
Collaborators must act as a team and plan for developing a topic, setting
time limits, moving between speakers, providing graphic aids and handouts,
answering questions, and managing the presentation.
Dividing the Topic
When collaborating on a presentation, speakers must plan roles and
responsibilities. One important issue to discuss is who will be responsible for
presenting what information. For example, three employees making a planning
proposal might divide the discussion this way: Speaker 1—introduction
of speakers, their qualifi cations, and the problem prompting the proposal;
Speaker 2—the proposed solution and the budget; Speaker 3—the conclusion
and the requested action. Therefore, the division of topics may dictate the
order of presenters.
Presentations | 297
In addition, sometimes a speaker’s expertise will require that
he or she deal with a particular aspect, such as an accountant
explaining a budget. If speakers are equally qualifi ed to present
the material, the group must defi ne other reasons for assigning
roles.
Setting Time Limits
The same way individual speakers must stay within a time
limit when making a presentation, group presenters also have
an obligation to stay within a time frame. After the group
determines the length of the entire presentation, the members
should decide the time allotted each member, keeping in
mind the material each member will cover and its relative
signifi cance. Given a 30-minute slot in the agenda, the team
members presenting the planning proposal might divide their
time this way:
Speaker 1
Introduction of speakers and their
qualifi cations; problem prompting
the proposal
10 minutes
Speaker 2
Proposed solution and budget
15 minutes
Speaker 3
Conclusion and requested action
5 minutes
Speaker 2 is allotted the most time because explaining the
proposed plan and justifying its budget are critical. If the
audience does not understand this information, the proposal may not be
approved. In addition, Speaker 2 must prove that a signifi cant problem
exists. Speaker 3 needs less time, not because concluding is unimportant, but
because conclusions should be direct and brief, giving the audience time to
ask questions.
Members of groups should be even more careful than individual speakers
to stay within their time limit. If one speaker exceeds his or her time limit,
another presenter is left with less time.
Transitioning Between Speakers
Audiences expect to be introduced to speakers. In a group presentation,
the speakers may choose to have another person introduce them or to
introduce themselves at the beginning of the session. Another option
is for each presenter to be introduced right before he or she begins to
speak.
When various speakers are answering questions, listeners prefer to be
reminded of the responding speaker’s name. Often a moderator will name
the presenter as the moderator asks him or her to address a question, such
as “Dr. Quan, would you like to answer the question on profi ling?”
Providing Graphic Aids and Handouts
Group presenters should discuss the use of graphic aids and handouts
when planning their presentation. Coordinating the appearance of slides,
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
In today’s age of global communications,
many presentation teams are made up of
members from across the globe. Therefore,
presenters must have a way to keep track of
presentation documents and ideas. They also
must have a quick way to distribute the most
current documents and keep team members
up to date. That is where virtual oﬃ ce space
comes into play. This space can be on the
Web or on their company’s intranet. It allows
the storage of shared ﬁ les as well as space
for discussion groups. Members also can
use virtual bulletin boards to post the latest
updates.
Think Critically
What are advantages and disadvantages
of having oﬃ ce space on the Web? on an
organization’s intranet?
298 | Chapter 12
transparencies, and handouts adds to the professionalism of a
group presentation. For example, members could agree to use
one slide template; a certain color, scheme, or typeface; or the
same headers and footers. Members should decide when to
distribute handouts. Will all handouts be provided to listeners at
one time, or will each presenter be responsible for distributing
his or her own handouts? Because some speakers do not want
the audience reading handouts while they speak, they may prefer
to distribute all handouts at the end of the presentation. Other
speakers may want the audience to have copies of materials
so they can take notes during the discussion. Speakers should
discuss and agree on a plan before the presentation.
Speakers also must decide what equipment they will need.
For instance, when two speakers plan to use overhead
transparencies and the third speaker wants an LCD projector,
they should agree on where to place the equipment and
whether any equipment must be moved between presentations.
Presenters using the same multimedia equipment should know their software
needs and make sure the equipment is compatible.
Answering Questions
Group presenters should anticipate questions and plan how to answer them.
In some presentations, the group may allow each speaker to take questions
when the speaker ends his or her portion. Other groups will answer
questions only after all presenters have completed their speeches. Presenters
also should know whether a moderator will assign each question to a
particular presenter or whether the presenters will select questions. Speakers
are wise to plan answers for questions they expect to be asked. Therefore,
collaborators might divide the topic areas so that each presenter can prepare
for questions in a certain area.
Groups may perform more effectively with leadership. Thus, many groups have
a lead presenter, a chairperson, or someone who manages the process. The lead
presenter often represents the group in discussions with meeting planners and
acts as liaison, then corresponds with group members to keep them informed.
The lead presenter sometimes speaks fi rst, previewing the presentation or
stating objectives, or last, summarizing key points and moderating questions.
The lead presenter may have other responsibilities, including:
Keeping speakers on schedule; calling time for those who talk too long.
◾
Keeping questions moving; preventing arguments and the monopolization
◾
of discussions.
Responding to requests for more information; mailing materials.
◾
An effective leader will ensure that all group members’ talents are used and
that all opinions are heard.
STOP AND THINK
In a collaborative presentation, how do speakers determine who will speak
when? Do groups need a lead presenter or chairperson? Why or why not?
Use the Oral Report
Evaluation Form worksheet
on the website when you
practice oral presentations.
Go to www.cengage.com/
school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter
12; then click Data Files. The
worksheet gives you the
opportunity to learn from the
evaluation and from advice
provided by the listeners.
In an article published in the magazine
Wired, Edward Tufte makes some
pointed comments about the use of
presentation software and PowerPoint®
in particular.
Go to the NET Bookmark for
Chapter 12. Read Tufte’s article.
In a brief paper, discuss whether you
agree or disagree with his commentary.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Presentations | 299
Chapter 12
Review
SUMMARY
1. Your ability to effectively present your ideas orally to others will affect
your success in the workplace.
2. Plan for your audience, topic, graphic aids, location, and stage fright.
3. Use audience analysis to organize as well as to compose the
presentation’s introduction, body, and conclusion.
4. Preparing involves creating an outline or notes and making
adjustments to your image.
5. After planning, organizing, composing, and preparing, rehearse using
a variety of methods to polish your presentation.
6. Check the seating, lighting, temperature, equipment, and graphic aids
to create the best possible listening environment.
7. When presenting as part of a team, think about how the team will
divide the topic among presenters; what amount of time to allot each
speaker; how to move between speakers; how to handle graphics,
handouts, and questions; and who will manage the presentation
process.
Checklist
Have I carefully analyzed my audience and clearly defi ned and focused
◾
the topic?
Have I planned how I can effectively use my response to stage fright?
◾
Have I composed a strong and effective introduction? body? conclusion?
◾
Will my outline or notes allow me to deliver a conversational performance
◾
instead of reading a speech or speaking without aid?
What type of graphic will be most effective for enhancing critical or
◾
complex ideas and for speaking to a group?
Have I prepared for an appropriate and professional appearance?
◾
Have I rehearsed and gathered feedback for improvement?
◾
Have I checked the room for seating, lighting, temperature, equipment,
◾
and graphics?
Have I effectively delivered the message using facial expressions, eye
◾
contact, graphics and handouts, notes, confi dence, and questions?
For a collaborative presentation, have my team and I divided the topic
◾
among speakers, established time limits, planned transitions, coordinated
graphics and handouts, planned for questions, and considered the
selection of a team leader or chairperson?
300 | Chapter 12
Build Your Foundation
1. You have been asked to speak to your nephew’s fi fth-grade social studies
class about Mexico and your work there as a Habitat for Humanity
volunteer. The social studies class lasts 50 minutes. If the instructor tells
you to talk as long as you like, what factors might you consider when
deciding on length?
2. Mrs. Nicoletti, a counselor, has asked you to explain to a group of 35 fi rst-
year students how to complete their registration cards. The entire process
involves using decisions the students have made previously and entering
data on a preprinted form. Choose a room in your school with which you
are familiar and imagine this location. What would be the most effective
way to arrange chairs for this presentation? Consider graphics you might
use. Consider how much, if at all, you want the students consulting with
each other. Other factors could be the room’s size and the location of
permanent features such as built-in cabinets. Write a description of how
you would arrange the room or draw the layout you think would be best.
3. Using one of the topics below or a topic your instructor supplies,
develop an idea for an effective attention-getting introduction for your
peers, other students in your school. Remember to state your topic
and to preview the points you will make in order to connect with your
audience.
cost of prescription
the Internet and
mass transit in rural or
drugs
entertainment
urban United States
globalization
teen employment
local pollution concerns
4. Fast-forward your life several years and imagine a time when your
supervisor fi rst says to you, “Great job on this report! Now you can present
the report at the __________ meeting.” (Fill in the blank with managers’,
stockholders’, team, committee, or some other group.) Suppose you have
six weeks before the date of the presentation. Develop a timeline with the
tasks you will undertake to prepare for an effective oral presentation.
The plan should identify what you will do and when you will do it
during the six weeks. Remember that you already have a written report,
but you need to develop an oral presentation appropriate for a different
audience. Also remember that this is your fi rst professional presentation,
so you want adequate rehearsal time to build your confi dence level.
5. Select or create a graphic aid that you can use in a two-minute
presentation to clarify or emphasize an idea. For example, you might bring
a tool to class and demonstrate how to use it. Or you could draw a graph
or chart and explain the process or statistics it illustrates. You also could
show a photograph, poster, or painting and explain the idea or concept it
supports.
Your Turn
6. Review an oral report you presented recently—in school or elsewhere,
formal or informal. List some changes you would make to improve your
effectiveness if you were to present it again.
7. Attend a presentation at school, in the community, or at work. If a live
presentation is not possible, watch a video of a speaker, perhaps
Presentations | 301
a politician, an editorial commentator, or an infomercial promoter. As
you view the presentation, make two lists: (1) positive elements that
make the speech work and (2) negative elements, things that detract
from the presentation’s effectiveness.
8. Choose a written report you completed recently or fi nd a model in a
textbook. Write an essay about decisions and changes you would make
to present the written information in an oral report.
9. Research a career you are considering. Look for information on employers,
salaries, working conditions, educational requirements, and hiring rates.
You could go to the library, talk with a counselor, visit someone working
in the fi eld, or talk with an instructor in the curriculum area. When you
have as much data as you need, think about making an oral presentation
to classmates who might be interested in the same career.
a. Write a brief analysis of your audience.
b. Decide on the main idea for your presentation. Write it in one
complete sentence.
c. List at least two ideas for information that could be enhanced with a
graphic aid.
d. Create at least one of the graphic aids listed in item c.
e. Prepare the outline or notes you would use for this presentation.
10. Plan a speech that you could deliver to your graduating class. Consider
audience and purpose when planning the speech. Will you need graphic
aids? If so, what kind of graphic aids would be appropriate? Share your
topic and notes with other students to gain feedback. Finally, deliver the
speech to your peers and ask for additional feedback.
Community Connection
11. Visit a senior center or a child care center in your area. Interview people
to determine topics of interest for the seniors or children. After doing
research (if needed) and collecting information, develop and deliver a
presentation at the center. Remember that you will probably need the
staff’s permission and help to arrange a time and setting. Also consider
the attention span of your audience.
12. Choose a cause for which you are concerned or passionate, such as
recycling, a soup kitchen, or proper hand washing. Develop and deliver a
presentation. The audience might be your class, a club, or another group.
13. As a representative of your school, offer to make a presentation at a
local library or community center on a topic of interest to the public.
You might choose a topic related to your school and its activities, such
as academic or athletic programs, clubs and other activities, the arts
(a planned theater production), diversity among students, or contributing
factors for your school’s excellence. Or you could suggest a topic that
interests you and that you think would interest others. Plan and prepare
for the presentation, rehearsing in front of your classmates. Using
their feedback, adjust your graphic aids and delivery. If you can get
permission from a person in authority, deliver the presentation at the
library or community center. Otherwise, deliver the presentation to your
classmates.
302 | Chapter 13
Recommendation Reports
WRITE TO LEARN
Think of the last time you had to choose between two things. Maybe you
had to decide between two classes or two restaurants. In a one-page journal
entry, describe the process you used to make your decision, including your
comparisons and evaluations.
Chapter
Goals
Determine how a recommendation
◾
report is used and adjust the structure
to accommodate the reader
Devise criteria for evaluation after deter-
◾
mining the problem and possible solutions
Organize a recommendation report using
◾
the appropriate format
Compose a recommendation report by
◾
evaluating criteria and drawing conclusions
using a point-by-point analysis
Terms
appendixes, p. 317
◾
criteria, p. 308
◾
persuasive writing, p. 309
◾
point-by-point organization,
◾
p. 316
rank, p. 318
◾
receptive audience, p. 309
◾
recommendation report,
◾
p. 308
solicited, p. 308
◾
standard, p. 318
◾
subcriteria, p. 312
◾
unreceptive audience, p. 309
◾
unsolicited, p. 308
◾
Focus on Recommendation Reports
Read the sample recommendation report on pages 303–306 and answer these
questions:
What two items are being compared?
•
On what factors (also known as criteria) is the recommendation based?
•
Why is this report presented in memo format?
•
What If?
The writers were not concerned about the environment?
•
The audience (decision maker) was opposed to the idea of purchasing a
•
car for courier service?
Recommendation Reports | 303
Sample Recommendation Report
304 | Chapter 13
Roberta Boyles
Page 2
July 15, 20—
SCOPE
Interstate Development’s directors have suggested that we rank safety as the ﬁrst criterion. The well-
being of our employees and the public is our ﬁrst priority.
Funcon is our second criterion. The car we purchase must be able to transport bulky, heavy loads of
product and display items as well as personnel up to 11 miles between each of our six stores.
To make sure we stay within budget, we have ranked our third criterion as cost. The directors have
allocated $26,500 for a new Courier Service vehicle.
Eﬃciency and environmental impact is our fourth criterion. The directors have set the goal of reducing
our carbon footprint by 20 percent over the next ﬁve years. We would like the new vehicle to contribute
to that eﬀort.
The remainder of this report will compare both cars to the four criteria.
DISCUSSION
Safety
A new vehicle must include:
•
Driver, front side, and passenger side airbags.
•
Anlock brake system.
•
Vehicle stability control system.
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid. According to the Dynasty website and sales brochures from a local
dealership, the Freedom Hybrid has all three airbags as standard equipment. The Freedom also includes
anlock brakes and stability control as well as a rearview camera and LiNC to allow hands-free operaon
of phones and music systems.
An innovave feature available on the Freedom is the No Blind Spot System with Crossing Alert, which
warns of the approach of hidden traﬃc. This safety feature could be valuable in prevenng accidents
that have occurred with Courier Service cars in the past. Another important note is that the 2010
Freedom was the Insurance Instute’s Top Safety Pick Award winner, and the government gave it a 5-
star rang, the highest possible, for safety. Therefore, we expect the 2011 model to be rated highly as
well.
Sample Recommendation Report, cont.
Recommendation Reports | 305
Roberta Boyles
Page 3
July 15, 20—
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid. The BLAU Pronto’s standard equipment includes the three airbags,
anlock brakes, and stability control.
Conclusion. While both vehicles meet the subcriteria for safety, the Freedom Hybrid is likely to have a
higher safety rang from the government and the Insurance Instute because of the 2010 design
features.
Function
The new vehicle will be driven almost enrely inside the city to deliver documents, boxes or single items
of clothing, display materials, and occasionally personnel. Thus, the car needs to be large enough to
accommodate packages as well as people comfortably and safely.
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid. The Freedom seats ﬁve and has front legroom of 42.3 inches and
rear legroom of 36.7 inches. It has a trunk volume of 16.5 square feet.
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid. The Pronto seats ﬁve and has front legroom of 41.7 inches and rear
legroom of 38.3 inches. It has a trunk volume of 10.6 square feet.
Conclusion. Both vehicles are designed to seat ﬁve people and have similar space for occupants.
However, the Dynasty Freedom has a considerably larger trunk volume for transporng boxes and
display elements such as mannequins.
Cost
Because the directors allocated $26,500, the cost of the vehicle must not exceed that amount.
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid. The price range for the Freedom Hybrid is $19,270–$26,150.
Dynasty has a $725 desnaon fee.
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid. The price range for the BLAU Pronto is $26,150–$29,045. BLAU has a $750
desnaon fee.
Conclusion. Both vehicles could meet the third criterion. The price ranges listed are MSRP
(manufacturer suggested retail price) and do not include rebates or tax incenves for purchasing
hybrid/fuel-eﬃcient cars.
Sample Recommendation Report, cont.
306 | Chapter 13
Roberta Boyles
Page 4
July 15, 20—
Eficiency and Environmental Impact
The new vehicle must be eﬃcient and environmentally friendly. Interstate Development’s directors
suggest the following features:
•
Hybrid or all electric engine
•
Fuel economy
•
Low environmental impact
Table 1 depicts a comparison of subcriteria for both vehicles.
FEATURES
DYNASTY
Freedom Hybrid
BLAU
Pronto Hybrid
Engine
2.5L Atkinson-Cycle I4 gas
191 horsepower
2.4L CVT
187 horsepower
MPG
41 city/34 highway
33 city/34 highway
Transion, electric to gas
electric up to 47 mph
electric up to 45 mph
Table 1. Comparison of Eﬃciency Features
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid. The Freedom Hybrid boasts 41 miles per gallon in the city, where its
electric motor can be used up to speeds of 47 miles per hour. Because the car can reach speeds of up to
47 miles per hour on its electric motor, it rarely needs to use the gas engine in city driving. A bonus is
that its eco-friendly cloth seats are made of recycled fabric.
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid. Although the Pronto Hybrid meets the subcriteria, its stascs are similar
to but do not match those of the Freedom.
Conclusion. The Dynasty Freedom Hybrid meets and exceeds our subcriteria for eﬃciency and low
environmental impact.
Sample Recommendation Report, cont.
Writing@Work
Anne Nickel is a brand engagement consultant
in London, England, for a global brand-building
company called The Brand Union. Her job requires
a combination of marketing and management skills.
She advises clients about what they need to change
inside their organization to fit and promote their brand.
In her role, Anne writes recommendation reports to help clients learn
how to strategically adjust their marketing campaigns, business practices,
communication methods, and reward policies. According to Anne, these reports
combine information gathered through other kinds of writing. “In order to
write a recommendation report, one also has to write interview questions,
interview notes, an implementation plan, and briefs for the design team that tell
them what to produce for the client. So it requires a diverse writing skill set.”
She believes that persuasive documents like these need to do many things at
once in order to have the desired effect on their audience. “Recommendation
reports require both rational and emotional persuasion. Case studies and
statistics can be used as evidence for rational persuasion. Visuals, like graphics
and video, help emotional persuasion by bringing life to ideas beyond the words
used to enunciate them.”
Anne emphasizes that brilliant evidence and graphics will not do anything for
your report if you fail to address the correct audience. “It is important to direct
your recommendation to a person who will be open to your ideas and support
them. Sometimes this person is the top decision maker and in control of the
budget, but other times it is someone who has the connections or authority to
be a cheerleader for your ideas and pitch them to the powers that be.”
Think Critically
1. Think of a brand that you use regularly. Why do you continue to choose
it over other brands? Is it style, prestige, price, value, habit, loyalty,
convenience, or something else? How much of your choice is rational
(that is, based on the actual qualities of the product)?
2. What recommendations do you have for the brand? Think about ways the
manufacturer could sell more of the product, add features that consumers
like you would pay more for, reduce its environmental impact, and so on.
Printed with permission of Anne Nickel
Courtesy of Anne Nickel
Recommendation Reports | 307
308 | Chapter 13
WHAT IS A RECOMMENDATION REPORT?
The recommendation report is a problem-and-solution report, a written
answer to a need that arises in the workplace. Most problems, however,
have more than one solution. The recommendation report suggests the best
solution to a problem or need. It helps readers make a choice. Employees
write recommendation reports to help decision makers choose the best
solution. Recommendation reports help people solve large and small
problems, from constructing a building to selecting a new computer.
Sometimes the recommendation is the purchase of equipment. In the sample
at the beginning of the chapter, Lorraine Nevelle and Rodrigo Reyes examine
two vehicles and recommend the 2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid for Interstate
Development’s courier service. Throughout this chapter, you will look more
closely at some of the decisions Lorraine and Rodrigo made while writing
their report.
Sometimes a recommendation report proposes a course of action. For
example, Hennepin Logging has decided to expand and has narrowed the
location of its new plant to three towns in Virginia. The report compares and
contrasts the three sites against the criteria—factors on which a decision is
based—the company thinks are important and recommends a location. You
will see how the writer gathers data and plans the report.
The last time you bought school supplies, you chose from
among several alternatives. Knowing that you needed a three-
ring binder, you probably examined several different three-ring
notebooks. The choice you made depended on factors you
considered important and may have included cost, special
features such as clipboards or zippered pencil pouches,
durability, and color. Companies go through the same thinking
process when they make choices.
Decision makers who have the power to implement your
recommendations read recommendation reports. Sometimes one
person reads the report, and a committee or board often votes on
recommendations. The report is usually written to a supervisor,
but sometimes recommendations are made to coworkers.
The report can be solicited (asked for) or unsolicited (not asked
for). In solicited reports, your reader asks you to analyze several
alternatives. This reader understands the need and will be more
receptive to your suggestions.
In an unsolicited report, your audience is not expecting your
recommendations. You may have diffi culty gauging this reader’s reaction.
Your reader may be receptive and appreciate your initiative in helping to
make decisions. On the other hand, your audience may be unwilling to
accept your recommendations for a variety of reasons. For example, Kamelia,
a production supervisor at a large wholesale nursery, was asked by her
manager to help select the walkie-talkies to be issued to all employees.
Because Kamelia’s supervisor was already committed to purchasing the
walkie-talkies, he was receptive to her recommendation.
Look at the sample
recommendation report
that introduces this chapter.
Where is the actual
recommendation made? Is
this a logical place for the
recommendation? Why or
why not?
Warm Up
TYPICAL READER
Someone who must make a choice between
several options; a decision maker who is
seeking accurate, speciﬁ c information focused
on prioritized factors for each option.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Meeting the reader’s needs by addressing the
reader’s prioritized factors for each option
in a clear, detailed, accurate manner and
by organizing the information logically and
presenting it in the standard organizational
plan for recommendation reports.
Recommendation Reports | 309
However, Troy received a different reaction from his supervisor. Troy,
a landscape maintenance technician, took the initiative to develop a
recommendation report in which he suggested buying a golf cart. Troy
believed the golf cart would be helpful in carrying chemicals for spraying,
moving new plants, and getting around the grounds to inspect for pests.
However, his employer, who had not requested the recommendation report,
did not agree that a golf cart was necessary or would improve the quality of
work. Troy’s audience was not receptive to his recommendation.
An analysis of your audience’s attitude may affect how you organize your
report. A receptive audience, readers who are open to ideas or suggestions,
will be ready to read the recommendation early in the report (as is presented
in the sample at the beginning of this chapter). An unreceptive audience,
readers who are not open to ideas or suggestions, will require more careful
research and supporting information up front, with the recommendation
coming last. You need to lead this reader carefully to your recommendation.
Table 13.1 shows the strategies for accommodating receptive and unreceptive
audiences.
Recommendation reports are persuasive. Persuasive writing, writing to
convince others, requires that you analyze audiences carefully, for your job
Blaine Schroeder is an accountant for Gildstein’s Business Managers. He
has the difficult job of recommending to his supervisor which construction
company should construct a small office building: Wilmore Construction
Company Inc. or Galloway Builders. Wilmore is a larger company and has a
better reputation for finishing tasks on schedule.
Bids from both companies fall within Gildstein’s budget, but the office
building must be completed in time for holiday sales. Galloway Builders is
owned by Schroeder’s brother-in-law, Ethan Galloway. The Galloways have a
child with a serious medical condition and really need the money they would
earn from this contract. Schroeder’s wife wants him to recommend her
brother’s company for the job. She claims that families should look out for
one another.
Think Critically
What should Blaine Schroeder do?
Communication
Dilemma
Table 13.1
RECEPTIVE AUDIENCE
UNRECEPTIVE AUDIENCE
Introduction
Introduction
Recommendation
Scope
Scope
Discussion with more details
Discussion with limited details
Recommendation
310 | Chapter 13
is to convince your reader to act on your recommendation. Researched
facts, opinions of authorities, and logical thinking are the tools you
need to be convincing. Learn what information your reader expects in
the final report and how detailed the research should be. For example,
in the earlier situation, Kamelia knew that her audience approved of
purchasing the new equipment but had not chosen the brand or model.
As a result, she could focus her report on comparing the types of
walkie-talkies.
Troy, on the other hand, did not have his audience’s support from the
beginning. He was concerned not only with comparing the different
golf carts, but also with convincing the decision maker that golf carts
were needed. Further, if Troy had analyzed the audience, he would have
learned that three years earlier employees inside the planting sheds had
ordered two golf carts to move fl ats of seedlings from area to area. But the
carts were removed when employees were found to be playing with and
abusing them. If Troy had been aware of the previous incident, he could
have prepared his report to account for this history and explain how it
would not be repeated.
STOP AND THINK
If the reader of the vehicle recommendation had been unreceptive, where would
you have placed the recommendation section? Why must writers of persuasive
reports analyze audiences carefully?
STARTING A RECOMMENDATION REPORT
After you have analyzed your audience, you must defi ne your problem,
brainstorm solutions, and devise criteria.
Define Your Problem
In a solicited report, the person or group who requested the recommendation
report has identifi ed the problem. The problem is usually evident, but put
it into words anyway. In the opening sample report, Lorraine and Rodrigo
stated the problem: “The vehicle currently used to circulate documents
and product among the six downtown retail stores, a 2006 Dynasty XL7,
poses a safety hazard to the drivers and pedestrians because of brake and
transmission problems. It also does not present a positive image for the
company because four accidents have left it dented and rusty.”
In an unsolicited report, the problem may need more explanation. Unlike
the solicited report, the unsolicited report is not requested. No one except
the report writer has noticed the problem or considered solutions. Therefore,
you must make certain that readers see the problem and its importance
clearly. If the problem needs more explanation than one or two sentences,
consider placing the explanation in a separate paragraph or paragraphs in the
introduction.
Some television commercials
help viewers deﬁ ne a
problem. Some commercials
are problems about which
people already know. Other
commercials are problems
that listeners may not have
considered before.
List some problems that
commercials deﬁ ne. For
example, an ad selling
mouthwash may make
people wonder whether they
have bad breath.
Warm Up
Recommendation Reports | 311
State the problem as specifi cally and precisely as possible. For example, “The
roof of Roosevelt Farms Bed and Breakfast leaked during the October 2, 2009,
hurricane and stained the dining room ceiling” is a better problem statement
than “Roosevelt Farms Bed and Breakfast had a leak.”
Brainstorm Solutions
Now brainstorm solutions to the problem. You may need others to help you
generate possible solutions. Explain the problem to your colleagues and tell
them you would like their ideas. Tell them that the focus is creative problem
solving and that the time for criticism will come later.
Take notes as ideas emerge. You could act as moderator to keep the group
on track and stop any criticism that creeps in. Narrow the choices to two or
three. You may use others’ advice to help narrow the choices.
When Lorraine and Rodrigo brainstormed solutions to the vehicle problem,
they generated a list of six vehicles. They narrowed the list to two when they
decided that an all-electric vehicle cost too much.
The search for solutions also may require research. Professional journals
and newsletters, LISTSERVs, government documents, and company reports
may reveal fi ndings that infl uence your recommendations. Seek as much
information as you need to brainstorm solutions.
Devise Criteria
As you narrow your solution choices, decide what criteria to use. Interview
people about what is important to consider when making your choice. Ask
all concerned—administration, workers, people who have used one of the
solutions. Getting opinions is important so that the solution you recommend
works for everyone.
Roneika West was asked to write a report for Hennepin Logging to
recommend a town in Virginia for the construction of a new plant. After
several meetings, three sites were selected as possible locations. Roneika
consulted with others to help her devise criteria. Table 13.2 shows some
of the preliminary information she gathered by consulting Hennepin’s
management, the workers who will relocate, and a furniture manufacturer
who buys wood from the company.
Table 13.1
FROM
TOWN SHOULD HAVE
Administration
10-acre plot of land
Available workforce
Adequate power supply
Workers who will relocate
Effective, successful schools
Affordable housing
Local furniture manufacturer
Safe roads
Consistent, adequate water supply
Table 13.2
312 | Chapter 13
Writers, especially writers of recommendation reports, should consider
the interests of all stakeholders or all parties and people involved in an
issue. Because the decisions made based on the information and analysis
in the recommendation report could affect the stakeholders, a report that
represents the views of only one person or a few people is unfair. This report
could even be detrimental to the health of an organization or a company.
Highway construction is an example in which many opinions and
perspectives result in the best recommendation. Building a new road affects
many people. The highway can improve or destroy businesses, increase or
decrease property values, bypass or relocate homes, and change the character
of communities.
Public hearings, city council meetings, and other gatherings are usually held
for people to review the choice of plans and to hear other people’s ideas.
The process takes a great deal of time, possibly five or ten years or more.
However, the process is vital to the fairness of all stakeholders.
Imagine a system in which roads and highways or schools are built with
no opportunity for citizens to provide input. If only one person or group is
represented in the decision making, many unanticipated problems could
result.
Think Critically
Think of some decisions that excluded certain stakeholders. How might these
situations have affected stakeholders who were not excluded?
Focus on
Ethics
From this preliminary list, Roneika was able to classify like items under
larger categories. The categories—resources, utilities, and living conditions—
became the criteria for her fi rst draft. The smaller units under each
category that help to defi ne each criterion (singular of criteria) became the
subcriteria, or more specifi c categories of criteria, as follows:
Resources
Utilities
Living Conditions
land
power
schools
workforce
water
housing
roads
Next, Roneika worked to further defi ne each of the subcriteria. Again, she
went back to her colleagues and asked these questions: What is a fair price
for the land? How many people are needed in the workforce? What kind of
labor is needed, skilled or unskilled?
If your list of criteria is longer than four or fi ve items, reevaluate their
importance to limit your list to no more than fi ve. Working with more than
fi ve criteria might overwhelm your readers.
Recommendation Reports | 313
FORMATTING AND ORGANIZING
RECOMMENDATION REPORTS
The recommendation report is a highly structured report that uses a
consistent outline and a comparison/contrast discussion. You may have
seen such reports written as multipage paper documents. However, the
best format for a recommendation report may not be a multipage paper
document. In fact, you have many formatting choices for these types of
reports.
If you are submitting a report to a prospective client, you might send it as
an e-mail attachment, post it to a website, create and send a CD-ROM, or
provide hyperlinks in a Microsoft® Word document. As with other decisions,
you should base your choice of format on the audience’s needs.
For instance, an audience that frequently uses the Internet would appreciate
the ease and speed of having access to an online report. In contrast, some
readers are more comfortable with a traditional print document; so the
writer could submit a paper copy or send the document as an e-mail
attachment. Whatever the format, recommendation reports follow the same
basic outline.
Outline
The recommendation report consists of introductory material,
a recommendation (summary of discussion), scope (what the
report covers and why), and discussion (analysis of criteria—the
factors used in making the decision).
Introduction
The introductory section:
States the purpose of the report.
◾
Briefl y explains the problem.
◾
Narrows the choice to two or three items.
◾
Gives a criteria list.
◾
Previews the rest of the report.
◾
May include the investigation method.
◾
The model introduction in Figure 13.1 on the next page orients
the readers to the information in the body of the report—the site
recommendation for a real estate license review course. This
Look closely at the headings in
the sample recommendation
report beginning on page 303.
What kind of information goes
under each heading?
Warm Up
Bob Kantin, spokesperson for an online
company that develops and sells sales
proposal systems, has written the online
article “Recommendation Reports and
Internal Politics.”
Go to the NET Bookmark for
Chapter 13 and read Kantin’s article.
Do you agree with him? Are internal
politics a signiﬁ cant concern for all
recommendation report writers? for
some recommendation report writers?
Explain.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
STOP AND THINK
Should writers of solicited recommendation reports define the problem? Is
brainstorming for solutions best done alone or in collaboration? Explain.
314 | Chapter 13
model introduction explains the history and the problem, the recommended
solution, the criteria, and the investigation method.
Recommendation
The recommendation section of the report:
Makes the recommendation.
◾
Uses criteria to summarize reasons for the recommendation.
◾
Because readers want the important information fi rst, the recommendation
section appears early in the report unless the report is unsolicited. As Figure
13.2 shows, this section may be brief. In longer reports describing more
complex situations, the section could be several paragraphs. If you offer
multiple recommendations, number and list them.
Figure 13.1 Sample Introduction
Fi
S
l I t
d
ti
Figure 13.2 Sample Recommendation
Fi
S
l R
d ti
Recommendation
I recommend that the March 20— review course be held in the meeting room
of the Paradise Hilton. This venue offers a central location, a reasonable
cost for use of the facilities (when the hotel caters the luncheon), access to
requested electronics with on-site technicians for service, and hot and
cold menus.
Recommendation Reports | 315
Scope
The scope section:
Lists criteria, in descending order from most important to least important,
◾
that were given in the introduction.
Explains why the criteria were chosen and why they are ranked as
◾
they are.
This discussion assures writers and readers that they agree on important
factors in the decision. This section also explains how information is
analyzed, as shown in Figure 13.3 in the description of criteria and
explanation of why each criterion was chosen.
Discussion
The discussion section:
Analyzes each of the criteria thoroughly.
◾
Draws conclusions about which item is better for each criterion.
◾
Organize the discussion section of the report by criteria, starting with the
most important and moving to the least important. Give each criterion a
major heading. Each criterion is introduced with an explanation of essential
elements or features. Then each item being considered is compared to the
ideal set in the introduction. Finally, a conclusion shows the results of the
comparison for the criterion. Figure 13.4 presents one part of a discussion
section.
Figure 13.3 Sample Scope Section
i
l
316 | Chapter 13
Remember, receptive readers are interested primarily in the recommendation,
which is why it appears early in the report. Unreceptive readers, however,
are more likely to be persuaded if the recommendation is placed last, after
the discussion.
Comparison/Contrast Discussion
Most recommendation reports follow an organizational plan called point by
point, as in the sample report at the beginning of the chapter.
Point-by-point organization zigzags from one item to the next, comparing
or contrasting some aspect of one item to the same aspect of another item.
Under the safety heading in the opening sample report, the writers compare
the safety features of the two cars. Both vehicles are collected under one
point, or criterion—in this case, safety. Figure 13.5 shows the zigzag from
one item to another.
Figure 13.5 Point-by-Point Organization
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid
Safety
Safety
Function
Function
Cost
Cost
Eﬃ ciency and Environmental Impact
Eﬃ ciency and Environmental Impact
Figure 13.4 Discussion Section
i
i
i
S
i
Recommendation Reports | 317
CRITERION 1
SAFETY
Item 1: Explain everything about item 1.
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid
Item 2: Explain everything about item 2.
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid
Conclusion: Which item is better and why?
Conclusion
CRITERION 2
FUNCTION
Item 1: Explain everything about item 1.
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid
Item 2: Explain everything about item 2.
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid
Conclusion: Which item is better and why?
Conclusion
CRITERION 3
COST
Item 1: Explain everything about item 1.
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid
Item 2: Explain everything about item 2.
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid
Conclusion: Which item is better and why?
Conclusion
CRITERION 4
EFFICIENCY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
Item 1: Explain everything about item 1.
2011 Dynasty Freedom Hybrid
Item 2: Explain everything about item 2.
2011 BLAU Pronto Hybrid
Conclusion: Which item is better and why?
Conclusion
Table 13.3
Table 13.3 links a general outline for this section (left column) to the
headings in the discussion section (right column) in the model report.
Appendixes
Appendixes are another component of some recommendation reports.
Appendixes, the plural of appendix, are supplementary materials that appear
at the end of a document. Report writers may decide to attach information,
documents, or supporting materials they believe will aid the audience in
understanding the report.
Each document or supplementary item is entered and labeled as a
separate appendix. Usually, elements that become appendixes are not
directly involved in the report but are closely aligned to information
presented.
For instance, a recommendation report suggesting the hiring of four part-
time salesclerks rather than one full-time employee could include a company
salary scale as Appendix A and a chart of employee shifts and positions as
Appendix B. Some information drawn from these documents would probably
be used in the report, but the entire documents might be too distracting to
include. So they would appear at the end of the document as appendixes,
where readers may refer to them.
Complete the Point-by-Point
Organization worksheet
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 13;
then click Data Files.
318 | Chapter 13
COMPOSING RECOMMENDATION REPORTS
While decisions about formatting and organizing a recommendation report
are likely to have an impact on readers’ perceptions, those elements are
secondary to decisions made in composing: setting criteria, evaluating
criteria, and researching criteria.
Setting Criteria
Criteria, the factors on which you base a decision, play an important role in the
recommendation report. Table 13.4 shows where and how criteria are used.
The criteria you choose depend on what you, your audience, and your
colleagues think is important. Safety, function, cost, and effi ciency and
environmental impact are important factors in the choice of a new car for
Interstate Development, as noted in the introduction of the report at the
beginning of this chapter. After you select criteria, you must present them in
a logical, consistent way.
All criteria must be presented with a name, a rank (the relative importance
of one criterion to another), and a standard (a means of defi ning and
limiting a criterion). Choose a simple name, usually a noun that is parallel to
the other criteria. Some reports use questions such as What is the cost? and
How safe is this option?
Give each criterion a rank to show its relative importance to the other
criteria. Which is the most important criterion? the second most important?
the third most important? List them in descending order, from most to least
important. The rank of criteria may change depending on the circumstances.
For example, younger workers with families moving with the Hennepin
Logging operations to Virginia might rank the criteria for an acceptable
town as schools (fi rst), family entertainment (second), and medical facilities
Alvaro likes contact sports
(football, soccer, and boxing),
Italian food, country music,
and horror ﬁ lms. In small
groups, design an ideal
Saturday for Alvaro. Why did
you choose these activities
for Alvaro? Now design an
ideal Saturday for your group.
Warm Up
Table 13.4
CRITERIA ARE
Introduced
in the
Introduction
Summarized
in the
Recommendation
Explained and ranked
(Why chosen and ranked?)
in the
Scope
Evaluated (one by one)
in the
Discussion
STOP AND THINK
What heading of a recommendation report contains the most diverse
information? What does it mean to “provide a preview of the rest of the report”?
Which part of the report will be most difficult for you to write? Why?
Recommendation Reports | 319
(third). Older workers might rank the criteria as medical facilities
(fi rst), family entertainment (second), and schools (third).
Finally, determine the standards of (or limits to) the criteria. For
example, if Interstate Development will not pay more than $26,500
for a vehicle, then that amount, $26,500, sets the standard for cost.
If families moving with Hennepin Logging to Virginia expect a
class A trauma center to be within a half hour’s drive of the town,
an accredited trauma center with a class A certifi cation within a
25-mile radius could be the standard for medical facilities.
You may need help refi ning your criteria. In the opening sample
report, the vehicle had to meet several subcriteria under safety.
Seek ideas and opinions from as many stakeholders as possible.
In your report, list subcriteria when you get to the appropriate
criterion section. Like criteria, subcriteria should be listed in
descending order of importance.
In the opening sample report, the vehicle had to meet several
subcriteria under safety. Because the decision makers consider
safety to be of primary concern, it is ranked as the fi rst
criterion. The standard is security for passengers and cargo. And
subcriteria include driver, front side, and passenger airbags; an
antilock braking system; and a stability control system. The recommendation
is based on fi ndings related to the criteria and subcriteria. Table 13.5
summarizes how to develop the criteria in your report.
Evaluating Criteria
Evaluating criteria is a step-by-step process. Jacob is comparing the safety
features of two swing sets for his daycare center: Play Time Gym Set
and Kiddie Swing Set. Consider the three subheadings—Play Time Gym
Set, Kiddie Swing Set, and Conclusion—under the criterion Safety in a
recommendation report comparing playground equipment for a daycare
center. Under Play Time Gym Set, the writers discuss the safety subcriteria for
one set of swings. Under Kiddie Swing Set, the writers discuss the same safety
subcriteria for another set of swings. On the following page, Table 13.6 shows
how, through discussion, the writers check off the subcriteria one by one.
The checklist shows at a glance that the Play Time Gym Set more completely
meets the preschool’s needs for safety. The Play Time Gym Set meets four
out of four needs; the Kiddie Swing Set meets one out of four needs. A
simple count shows that the Play Time Gym Set wins in the safety category.
After the comparison is made, the results are easy to summarize in the
conclusion, which follows the discussion of each item.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Some recommendation reports are long,
formal, and directed to a large and diverse
audience. In such cases, these reports are
often published online instead of or in
addition to being published in print. Do an
online search for one such recommendation
by the New Jersey Teen Driver Study
Commission.
Think Critically
After reviewing the report, make a list of
similarities and diﬀ erences between the New
Jersey report and the sample recommendation
report beginning on page 303.
NAME
A noun, noun phrase, or question
RANK
Criteria listed from most important to least important
STANDARD
A limit that clarifies each criterion (cost, size, quantity, and so on)
SUBCRITERIA
A list of more detailed criteria that fall under one criterion heading
Table 13.5
320 | Chapter 13
Suppose the Kiddie Swing Set had met only the special features and cost
criteria and the Play Time Gym Set had met only the safety criteria. Then
you would make a judgment call. Safety is ranked as the fi rst concern, more
important than special features and cost. Therefore, you would recommend
the Play Time Gym Set.
Suppose, however, that both items meet the criteria. Then you should look
for some deciding factor. Maybe the cost of one item is lower. Maybe the
delivery is quicker or the guarantee is better. In those rare cases where there
is no real difference between the two items, you are free to recommend
either one—or you may want to set other criteria.
THE PLAY TIME GYM SET MEETS THE SUBCRITERIA EASILY.
Smooth edges
✓
It has plastic seats with rounded edges.
Secure cap covers
✓
Fewer caps are needed because of the round edges.
Slide under 10 feet
✓
Slide is 6 feet long.
Inability to absorb heat
✓
Slide is plastic and will not absorb heat.
THE KIDDIE SWING SET DOES NOT MEET ALL OF THE SUBCRITERIA.
Smooth edges
✗
It has galvanized frames with few rounded edges.
Secure cap covers
✗
More cap covers are needed.
Slide under 10 feet
✓
Slide is 6 feet long.
Inability to absorb heat
✗
Slide is metal and will absorb heat from the sun.
Table 13.6
nidda/iStockphoto.com
Recommendation Reports | 321
Researching Criteria
Research data for a recommendation report can come from a variety of
places. Much of the research you conduct for a recommendation report will
be fi eld research in which you use surveys, interviews, and visits. Websites,
manuals, and catalogs can provide product information. Print media in
the library can be useful
too. Consumer Reports,
government publications,
business indexes, professional
journals, and the many ways
to research electronically also
can provide data you need.
Roneika West, in her
recommendation report
to Hennepin Logging,
used several sources. She
interviewed coworkers and
workers at another logging
operation. She surveyed the
employees who would move
to the new site. Roneika
visited the three towns in
Virginia and interviewed
town offi cials. She reviewed
government tax base
documents on the Internet.
Sometimes personnel, sales
brochures, a visit to a store,
or sales representatives
provide all of the information
the writers need.
Be alert to opportunities to present research data in graphics. The opening
sample report uses tables of features. Other possibilities for graphics are
pictures or diagrams of equipment, pie graphs of survey results, and bar
graphs to compare items.
STOP AND THINK
Name the sources you might use to research the following recommendation
report topics: bass fishing boats, novels, and uniforms for nurses.
Riser/Getty Images
322 | Chapter 13
Chapter 13
Review
SUMMARY
1. Decision makers read recommendation reports. Reports can be solicited
(asked for) or unsolicited (not asked for). For receptive audiences,
place the recommendation section early in the report. For unreceptive
audiences, place the recommendation section later in the report.
2. Writers get started on a recommendation report by defi ning the
problem, generating possible solutions, and devising criteria. They
interview colleagues and others to help with the prewriting process.
3. The recommendation report follows a tight structure using a
consistent outline and a comparison/contrast discussion. The major
sections include an introduction, the recommendation, the scope,
a thorough discussion, and appendixes. The comparison/contrast
organization follows a point-by-point pattern that discusses all
solutions under one heading or criterion. The recommendation report
may be presented in one of many different formats based on the
audience’s needs.
4. Criteria are presented in the introduction, summarized in the
recommendation, explained in the scope, and thoroughly analyzed in
the discussion.
Checklist
Have I devised a reasonable set of criteria by which to judge the items
◾
under analysis?
Have I further defi ned the criteria by setting standards and including
◾
appropriate subcriteria?
Does my introduction give the purpose of the report, defi ne the problem,
◾
narrow choices, and introduce criteria in order of importance?
Have I considered whether my audience is receptive or unreceptive? If
◾
the audience is unreceptive, did I make the necessary adjustments to
accommodate an unreceptive audience?
Does the scope explain why the criteria were chosen and why they were
◾
ranked as they were?
Is the organization of the discussion clear? Does it follow a point-by-point
◾
organizational pattern?
Have I used graphics appropriately? Is the document attractive?
◾
Have I considered the appropriate format for my audience and the
◾
appendixes that would help the audience make an informed decision?
Recommendation Reports | 323
Build Your Foundation
1. Using the Internet, research one of the products listed below. Then
determine an audience, a person or group that might use the product.
Using the information you gather on different types or models and
different manufacturers’ products, devise a reasonable set of criteria
by which to judge the items under analysis. Name and describe the
audience and list the criteria in order of importance. Also explain each
criterion and why it was selected.
a. Golf clubs
b. Smartphone
c. DVD player/recorder
d. Digital camera
e. Cosmetics (for men or women)
f. Backpack
2. Suppose you work for a real estate management company. In one of the
offi ce buildings your company manages, the heating and air conditioning
unit stopped working today. The technician assigned to repair the
equipment says that the unit cannot be fi xed and should be replaced.
The tenant cannot run her business without adequate heating, so she
expects immediate action. The technician suggests TempPro heating
units as well as Environease machines. He says that both are good
products, each with a fi ve-year warranty.
a. Other than warranty, what criteria might the real estate management
company establish?
b. Suggest a standard for one of the criteria.
c. Write a problem statement for a recommendation report using this
situation. Add specifi c information as needed.
d. What graphics might be useful in the recommendation report
developed in this case?
3. Sunee’s doctor has told her to eat a nutritious diet low in fat,
cholesterol, and salt and high in complex carbohydrates. Help her
evaluate the butter substitutes listed below in the two columns on the
right based on the criteria on the left. What conclusion can you draw
from your evaluation?
Substitute
Margarine (1 tbsp)
Table spread (1 tbsp)
#1 Low in fat
17% fat
11% fat
#2 Low in cholesterol
0% cholesterol
0% cholesterol
#3 Low in salt
4% salt
5% salt
#4 High in complex
carbohydrates
0% complex carbohydrates
0% complex carbohydrates
4. Revise the following recommendations section:
After thoroughly studying the options, I recommend the following
actions: closing the drive-through payment window, reducing the
day-shift staff by one employee, encouraging more use of the
computerized self-serve stations in the offi ce, and using student interns
324 | Chapter 13
to teach patrons how convenient and easy the online options are to use.
Otherwise, I suggest we do nothing at this time and study our operations
for other possible solutions.
Your Turn
In small groups, use one of the following scenarios to answer items 5–9. You
do not need to use the same scenario for all fi ve questions.
a. You are on the Entertainment Committee to decide which band to
hire for the annual Holiday Ball. According to the survey you sent,
employees are evenly divided on which of three groups to choose:
Newton Jazz Ensemble, Midnight City Rock Band, or Down and Dusty
Country Band.
b. You are on the Hampton Scholarship Committee. Hampton Company
gives a $1,000 scholarship to a deserving student every year. The
guidance counselor has chosen Dario Mesa and Allison Jurevicius as
the top two contenders for the scholarship. You and the committee
must select one of these students.
c. As a member of Ammsco Chemical’s Quality Circle, you must decide
what microwave to buy for the new employee lounge. You have
narrowed your choice to two: the Trimstyle Model 1400 and the Even
Cook Model 550. You, along with the members of your Quality Circle
team, must choose the new microwave.
5. Write an introduction to a recommendation report for item a, b, or
c. Add details if necessary. Look at the model and at the outline
under “Formatting and Organizing Recommendation Reports” in this
chapter. You may begin your introduction with “The purpose of this
report is to. . . .”
6. For any two of the preceding scenarios, brainstorm a list of criteria.
Narrow your list to the top three or four. Rank them in order from most
important to least important.
7. Choose one of the lists of criteria from item 5. Apply a standard, or limit,
to each of the criteria. Devise subcriteria for one of the criteria.
8. In an oral or written scope section, tell your classmates why you chose
your criteria and why you ranked them the way you did.
9. Generate an outline for two of the scenarios. Follow the format shown
below. For now, make your best guess for the conclusion under each
criterion.
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Criterion 3
Item 1
Item 1
Item 1
Item 2
Item 2
Item 2
Conclusion
Conclusion
Conclusion
10. Request from your school or district administration a copy of a
recommendation report that failed. Review the report using the
guidelines in this chapter. Write an explanation of why you believe the
report is ineffective and what you would do to improve it.
Recommendation Reports | 325
Community Connection
11. List some problems or opportunities in your community. Focus for a moment
on the one you care about most. Could two or three courses of action solve
this problem? Write a report to your city offi cial recommending a course of
action. Research your courses of action using the library or other resources.
12. Ask several local businesses for examples of recommendation reports
they have used. Review the reports and compare them to the guidelines
covered in this chapter. Choose one report to critique. Discuss its
strengths and weaknesses and share your fi ndings with the class.
13. Identify a faculty or staff member at your school who is preparing to
make a decision, perhaps what to purchase (such as a new microscope
for the science lab) or which selection to make (such as the speaker for
graduation or a band for Homecoming). Ask the decision maker for the
opportunity to prepare a recommendation report based on the situation.
With permission to proceed, complete the following tasks:
a. Interview the stakeholders. Using your interview notes, create a
document that defi nes what each stakeholder seeks in a solution.
b. Use the information gathered from stakeholders to devise criteria.
c. Brainstorm potential solutions and research the two that look to be
most promising.
d. Develop your recommendation report comparing the two solutions to
the criteria.
e. Seek constructive criticism from your classmates and instructor.
f. Revise the report.
g. Submit the revised recommendation report to the decision maker and
to your instructor.
14. Check with your schools’ clubs and organizations to learn about any
products or services they are considering. For example, if one of the clubs
or organizations is planning a dance or performance, perhaps the group
will be searching for a band, a DJ, a karaoke machine, or stage sets. Ask
if you can do the research and write a recommendation report. Remember
that you will need to interview some of the organization’s leaders to
establish criteria. After developing the report, submit it to your instructor
and/or classmates for their review. Revise, edit, and then submit it to the
organization. Ask for the group’s feedback and fi nal decision.
15. Local governments are likely to use recommendation reports to
make decisions about many things, from purchasing vans and buses
to contracting with paint companies. For that reason, arrange an
appointment to interview someone in city government who writes
recommendation reports. During the interview, ask about the research,
the writing process, and the fi nal document. If possible, get a copy of a
report and have the interviewee explain its development. Focus on skills
that will help you become a better report writer. Write a summary of the
important information you gained during the interview.
16. With a partner, write a recommendation report to a local agency
in which you suggest an action or a decision that will improve
circumstances for a group of people or all citizens of the community.
326 | Chapter 14
Proposals
WRITE TO LEARN
Think of a time when you had a successful sales experience. Perhaps you
persuaded a person or a group to buy a product or service or to agree to an
idea such as a fund-raiser or a community or family project. In a journal
entry, write a narrative about that experience. Include ways in which you
prepared to make the sale as well as a description of your audience.
Chapter
Goals
Define proposals and determine
◾
their purpose
Plan to write proposals
◾
Compose information proposals
◾
Compose formal proposals
◾
Terms
appendix, p. 342
◾
executive summary, p. 330
◾
letter of transmittal, p. 342
◾
limitations, p. 335
◾
memo of transmittal, p. 342
◾
pagination, p. 343
◾
prefatory material, p. 345
◾
proposal, p. 329
◾
RFP, p. 331
◾
scope, p. 335
◾
solicited proposal, p. 330
◾
unsolicited proposal, p. 331
◾
Focus on Proposals
Read the sample proposal on the next page and answer these questions:
Who might the head custodian have consulted about the proposed
•
solution?
What are some alternative solutions the group may have considered?
•
Do you agree with the recommendation to hire a new custodian? Why
•
or why not?
What would you include in a list of the positive and negative supporting
•
ideas for one alternative solution that you choose?
What If?
Most of the events requiring special setup were scheduled in the summer
•
when school was not in session?
The school had a hiring freeze?
•
The current custodians’ hours and wages had been reduced because of
•
budget problems?
Proposals | 327
Sample Proposal
TO:
Dr. Marn Svoboda, Principal
FROM:
Emme Yackley, Head Custodian
DATE:
July 14, 20—
SUBJECT:
Problem
Proposal for Addional Night Custodian
The custodians who work the evening shi cannot complete all of the special setups required
for meengs and clean the rooms eﬃciently. Hiring an addional custodian to work the
would help ensure that all of the work gets done.
midnight shi
Background
The workload for the night shi consists of cleaning the classrooms and oﬃces, the halls, and
the restrooms. When setups are required, custodians must move tables and assemble rows of
chairs. In addion, the cleaning of these areas sll must be done. The number of special setups
has been increasing, as the following data shows.
January
February
March
April
May
June
Half-Year
Total
Teachers, students, and visitors oen comment that the building somemes looks clean and
somemes appears dirty. Unfortunately, a dirty building does not make for good public
relaons.
Solution
An addional custodian working the midnight shi could dismantle the setups. This person
would free the regular night custodians to clean. When no special setups are required, this
person could help clean, wash and polish ﬂoors, and vacuum oﬃces. The esmated cost to ﬁll
the posion of a night shi custodian is $22,500–$25,000 a year.
Beneits
If the midnight shi workload was shared by an addional custodian, the problems described
would be eliminated.
Conclusion
Staﬃng this new posion will be costly, but I believe the beneﬁts far outweigh the ﬁnancial
consideraons. I hope you will pursue the hiring of a custodian for the night shi.
328 | Chapter 14
Writing@Work
Meredith Beattie is co-founder
of The BEL Group, a company
that works toward capacity
building in the government and
nonprofit sectors. She writes
grant proposals for workforce development, public safety
infrastructure, and K–12 educational and cultural programs.
“Competitive proposal development requires time up front
to carefully consider the long-term effects of having a
proposal accepted,” says Meredith. “The difficulty is that an
organization’s staff may have little time to meet with you
and want you to ‘just write it.’ This can lead to a proposal
that wins the grant, but is not feasible for the organization to
implement. Getting organizations to spend planning time with you translates
into a better working team and a realistic proposal.”
The writing process is a complex endeavor that requires methodical attention
to detail. “A proposal has many moving parts, so the absolute first thing one
should do when beginning to write is to read, tear apart, and ‘become one’ with
the entire proposal structure,” advises Meredith. “The sections of a proposal are
interrelated. If you do not have a thorough grasp of the complete picture, you
can create a proposal that is full of contradictions.”
In Meredith’s experience, collaboration with the organization’s stakeholders
is key to a realistic proposal. “Reaching agreement on the overall goal, the
resources available to meet the goal, and the benchmarks the organization will
meet provides a clear framework for the writer. An accepted proposal becomes
the foundation of the contract with the funder. Reminding your stakeholders of
this may help them articulate reasonable and achievable goals.”
A major difficulty in writing a persuasive proposal is that the writer does not
know who his or her audience or competitors are. “Your writing needs to be
able to carry any reader—expert or neophyte—to the inevitable conclusion that
the applicant is best positioned to fulfill the intent and requirements stated
in the application,” says Meredith. “Your proposal may be the 200th one the
reviewer reads, so make it as easy as possible to digest, avoid colloquialisms,
and be compelling without being sensational.”
Think Critically
1. Why is it important that Meredith work with the organization to plan the
proposal? What may happen if she does not get enough input?
2. How would a writer make a proposal “as easy as possible to digest”?
Printed with permission of Meredith Beattie
Courtesy of Meredith Beattie
Proposals | 329
What physical projects
took place at your school
during the past year (for
example, repainting, repairs,
new walkways, or new
landscaping)? As you read this
part of the chapter, list the
types of proposals likely to
have been written before this
work could have been done.
Warm Up
WHAT IS A PROPOAL?
A proposal is a persuasive document that offers a solution to an identifi ed
problem or need. Proposals attempt to sell an idea, a product or service, or
a new concept or plan. Proposals may be brief or long. A one-page request
for a room change written to a club adviser and a 2,000-page multivolume
document selling a new type of amphibious tank to the Department of
Defense are examples of proposals.
Proposal comes from the base word propose. Have you ever proposed an
idea for a party to your friends? Do you know anyone who has proposed
marriage? If you are thinking of the meaning “to suggest” or “to make an
offer,” you are beginning to understand the purpose of a proposal.
A proposal can be a request for support. For instance, the local
Boys and Girls Club may send a proposal to the United Way
requesting money to resurface the club’s tennis court. Another
proposal might offer a customer goods or services. If a school
organization sells candy to raise money, the project probably
began with a proposal from the candy supplier.
The successful proposal persuades an audience to accept the
solution offered and to invest in the idea, product, plan, or
service. Employees can use proposals to respond to problems
rather than merely complain about them. The proposal provides
a professional means of presenting the employees’ ideas for
change, which can be empowering.
As Figure 14.1 illustrates, proposals can be categorized in
several ways relating to the audience: (1) internal or external;
(2) formal or informal; (3) solicited or unsolicited; or (4) sales,
research, grant, or planning.
TYPICAL READER
Any person (owner, manager, director,
technician, or client/customer) who makes
decisions.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Clearly and persuasively presenting informa-
tion the reader needs in order to make an
informed decision, anticipating questions and
arguments, using an organizational plan that
is logical and convincing, and developing ap-
propriate visual aids to enhance the message.
Figure 14.1 Types of Proposals
Proposal Category
Defi nition of Category
A. internal
within the organization
external
outside the organization
B. formal
contains parts used in formal reports
informal
omits elements of formal reports; is often briefer
C. solicited
is written in response to a request
unsolicited
is written independently without a request
D. sales
attempts to sell a product or service
research
seeks approval for a research study
grant
asks for funding for a project
planning
attempts to persuade the audience to take a certain
action
330 | Chapter 14
Internal and External
Readers of some proposals will be internal—that is, inside the
writer’s organization. Other readers will be external, or outside
the writer’s organization. Internal proposals usually attempt to
sell an idea or a plan, such as how providing on-site day care
can reduce the absentee rate at work, how merit raise funds
should be distributed, and how eliminating classes the day
before fi nals can ease stress and improve scores. External
proposals frequently try to sell goods or services as well
as ideas.
Informal and Formal
A proposal is informal or formal based on the degree to which
the conventions of formal report writing are followed and how
“dressed up” the document looks. Formal proposals contain
more parts than informal proposals. Writers decide how formal
a document should be based primarily on the audience and
its needs.
Because informal proposals often address an internal
audience that understands why the document was written,
these proposals are often brief, generally from one to
ten pages. An informed audience eliminates the need for
background information or an explanation of the problem. In addition,
the report has a fl exible organizational plan, uses less formal language,
and is frequently presented as a letter or memo. Occasionally, however,
a brief informal proposal may be written to an external audience when
the subject matter and proposed solution are simple and require little
explanation.
A proposal going to someone close (in the ranks of the organization)
to the writer is usually informal. Likewise, a problem and solution
that can be explained in a simple manner are presented in an informal
report. The proposal writer would not invest the often lengthy preparation
time involved in a formal proposal to suggest something as simple, for
example, as changing lunch schedules to allow for a company-wide
meeting.
Formal proposals, on the other hand, usually address an external and often
unfamiliar audience. They are organized according to standard elements
of formal researched reports, with a cover page, a letter of transmittal, a
title page, a table of contents, a list of illustrations, an executive summary
(a summary of the key information in each section of the proposal), body
discussion divided by headings and subheadings, appendixes, a glossary of
key terms, and a bibliography. (Not all formal reports will have all of these
sections.)
Solicited and Unsolicited
A proposal is solicited or unsolicited depending on the audience’s role
in its initiation. A solicited proposal is a proposal that the reader asked
the writer to prepare. A request may come from a manager at work who
The Foundation Center is a nonproﬁ t
agency that serves organizations that
give and seek grants. (A grant proposal,
or grant, is a type of proposal that seeks
money from a government agency,
foundation, or other funding source for
a speciﬁ ed project.) The Foundation
Center has tools and information for
both givers and receivers of grants.
Go to the NET Bookmark for
Chapter 14. Use the menu on the
left side of the page to select a section
of the proposal to read. Create a
PowerPoint® presentation about the
key points of that section.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Proposals | 331
sees a problem. The manager asks an individual or a team to study
solutions to the problem and present recommendations in a proposal.
The request might also appear in an RFP, or request for proposal. The
RFP states exactly what the customer seeks. Proposal writers then prepare
their documents to address the needs stated in the RFP. An unsolicited
proposal begins when the writer discovers a problem, such as an ineffi cient
production line or a lack of water fountains for employees who use
wheelchairs. The writer independently identifi es a problem, explains it,
and offers solutions.
Sales, Research, Grant, and Planning Proposals
Based on function, or what the writer wants the audience to agree to
do, proposals fall into one of four categories: sales, research, grant, and
planning. Each category is explained below.
The sales proposal tries to sell a product or service.
◾
The research proposal asks for approval to begin a study or an
◾
investigation. A marine biologist at a university, for instance, might
request approval (and perhaps funding) to study the effect of acid rain
on a particular fi sh species.
The grant proposal seeks money from a government agency, foundation,
◾
or other funding source for a specifi ed project, such as developing a
horseback riding program for children with cerebral palsy.
The planning proposal attempts to persuade an audience to take a
◾
particular action, as in a plan to improve food service at a restaurant’s
drive-through window by rearranging preparation tables for effi ciency.
A single proposal may combine several of the categories mentioned here.
As you read proposals, you may discover that all four categories apply to
one document.
Formatting
The best format for a proposal is determined by the needs of the audience
and the function or type of proposal. Writers who are submitting a formal
proposal to a prospective client might want to prepare a bound booklike
document for decision makers to read and review. The writers of an informal
proposal that suggests ways to improve recycling efforts in a printing
company could send their proposal to the manager as an e-mail attachment.
A company that installs fi ber-optic cable in public buildings could post
a proposal to a website for viewers’ access. Some proposal writers take
advantage of images and hyperlinks to persuade the audience by sending
a CD or DVD with sound and video and links to useful sites.
Decision makers throughout business and industry read proposals. Most of
these people read only a portion of the proposal. They read those sections
that deal with their area of interest and expertise. Thus, readers evaluate the
proposal based on the data presented in the section or sections they review,
passing their acceptance or rejection to the person or group making the fi nal
decision.
332 | Chapter 14
STOP AND THINK
Why would a single proposal be categorized in more than one way?
Complete the Prewriting
worksheet available at www.
cengage.com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link for
Chapter 14; then click Data
Files.
CRITERIA
RESPONSE
Protects players
• 1" of solid tempered plastic covered with fiberglass for
resistance
• 34" foam padding from ear to ear
• Adjustable liner for greater protection
Is economical
• $29.90 per unit, 10% less than the average football helmet
• 10-year warranty/automatic replacements
Table 14.1
GETTING STARTED ON PROPOSALS
Now that you know about the different types of proposals, you are ready
to plan for writing one. The proposal begins with a problem or need. The
problem may be one that you discovered or one that someone pointed out
to you, as in an RFP or in a memo or letter from another professional.
A problem-solving strategy such as the one listed below can make your work
as a proposal writer easier and can help you focus on the problem.
Determine whether you have a problem or need.
◾
If you do, defi ne the problem or need and your purpose.
◾
Conduct preliminary research.
◾
Determine the scope and limitations of your study.
◾
Identify the factors or subparts of the problem or need.
◾
Brainstorm possible solutions.
◾
Gather data to support the possible solutions.
◾
If possible, test and evaluate the solutions.
◾
Once you have gone through the problem-solving process and are ready to
write your proposal, you can use one of several strategies to help you appeal
to your audience. Create a chart with a line drawn down the middle. On the
left side of the chart, write everything you think the readers need or want
from the solution. For instance, if you have an RFP, the criteria, as with a job
advertisement, are probably noted there. If you do not have an RFP, make
the list based on your research and insight into the problem and audience.
On the right side of the chart, list what your solution offers the reader in
fulfi lling his or her wants or needs. In other words, for every want or need in
the left column, explain how your plan will satisfy that want or need. Thus,
you will have persuasive tools ready to begin composing your proposal.
Table 14.1 relates to a sales proposal for football helmets.
Consider the impact of
audience when determining
the methods you use to be
convincing. For example, do
you use the same techniques
to persuade a friend or a
sibling to go to a movie as
you do to ask an instructor
for extra time to complete an
assignment or your boss to
give you a day oﬀ work?
Warm Up
Proposals | 333
Another technique that some proposal writers use when analyzing their
audience is to imagine how the readers think and feel. Anticipating the
readers’ questions and concerns may help you understand the readers’ points
of view and anticipate their needs. You also can gather audience information
relating to the issues in the proposal, as shown in Table 14.2.
You can add other questions to this audience analysis as you consider the
problem, solution, and benefi ts of the solution.
Monina Dagsaan is a new administrative assistant at a company that
produces exercise videos and infomercials. One of her first assignments
is to read proposals from a dozen catering companies to provide food for
the cast and crew on the days they shoot. Her boss, Hank Phelps, gives her
the RFP to which the catering companies are responding. He also gives her
an internal document about current catering costs, issues with the current
caterer, and the amount the company hopes to save with a new caterer.
Monina’s job is to sort through the proposals and give Hank the top three
or four proposals.
Monina notices that one of the proposals stands out from the others in how
closely it meets the needs of her company. It addresses the problems with
the current caterer, which were not listed in the RFP, and the cost it proposes
matches the exact amount her company wants to spend. Monina thinks that
the person who wrote this proposal must have seen her company’s internal
document.
Think Critically
What should Monina do?
Focus on
Ethics
Problem
• Is the reader aware of the problem?
• How much does the reader know about the problem?
• What factors about the problem most concern the reader?
Solution
• What do the criteria (perhaps in an RFP) established by the
audience tell you about the audience?
• How would you prioritize the decision maker’s concerns:
personnel, money, time, production, public image, and
ethics?
• How open-minded or how critical will your audience be?
Table 14.2
STOP AND THINK
Why should proposal writers define or state the problem?
334 | Chapter 14
COMPOSING INFORMAL PROPOSALS
The organizational strategy of the informal proposal, like that of many
technical reports, is designed for the busy decision maker. The proposal
usually opens with the most important information. So writers give
information about the problem and solution at the beginning of the report.
The organization of the rest of the proposal is fl exible to fi t the different
situations that writers are likely to encounter in their work. No matter how
you organize your proposals, you must remember your audience throughout
the writing process and ask yourself if you are responding to all of their
questions and doubts.
Informal proposals begin with an executive summary, or abstract. Following
the summary information, the proposals contain the same parts as any other
written document: an introduction, a body, and a conclusion. The summary,
or abstract, is a condensed version of the proposal. The introduction presents
the problem and solution and whatever background information the reader
needs. The body of the proposal is the main section. It covers the facts—the
specifi c evidence to convince the reader that the plan is worthwhile.
The last section, the conclusion, wraps up the report and spurs the reader to
action.
The specifi c information contained—and thus the headings used (with the
exception of the Executive Summary, or Abstract)—in each section may vary.
Depending on the problem and solution being proposed, the writer decides
which subsections to include and which to omit. Possible headings used in
each section are listed in Table 14.3.
SECTION
POSSIBLE HEADINGS
Introduction
Introduction
Problem Addressed and Solution (could be two headings)
Objectives of Proposed Plan
Background
Data Sources
Scope and Limitations
Body
Methods
Scheduling
Capabilities and Qualifications of Personnel
Materials and Equipment
Expected Results
Plan for Evaluating Results
Feasibility
Budget (usually in tabular form)
Justification of Budget Items (where necessary)
Conclusion
Conclusion
Summary of Key Points
Request for Action
Table 14.3
Recall several convincing
people—that is, when they
talk, you listen and believe
what they say. What gives
them a persuasive edge?
credibility? List any traits,
characteristics, or actions that
lend credibility to persuasive
people. Be prepared to share
your list with the class.
Warm Up
Proposals | 335
Drafting the Summary
The summary, or abstract, is designed with the
busy decision maker in mind. In a short informal
proposal, this section may appear on the title page
or, typically, as the fi rst paragraph in the report.
It provides a brief overview of the essential ideas
presented in the proposal. The summary should
include a problem statement, the proposed work
objectives, the project impact, and the work plan.
Cost is not usually discussed in the summary
because writers fi rst want to present all of their
evidence to persuade readers. They hope readers
will not be “turned off” by the cost, but will be
convinced by the proposal to justify the expense.
Drafting the Introduction
The introduction answers the “why” in the reader’s
mind. It explains why the proposal was written.
You must identify the problem up front. Another
important element of the introduction is your
proposed solution to the problem. This statement
should be clear but brief. Later, in the body, you
will provide further details and justify your proposal.
The introduction further explains your objectives,
or what you hope to accomplish, and clarifi es
the value of the work and why it is worth the
investment you seek. You also may need to include a
brief background of the problem in this section.
For example, a proposal to college administrators that recommends doubling
the number of bike racks on campus will be taken more seriously when the
writer explains the problem leading to the proposal and the way the bike
racks address the problem.
Students’ budgets are tighter than ever, and the cost of commuting adds to
students’ financial burden. The college raised the cost of a campus parking
permit twice in the last two years, and the one-way fare on the most popular
bus route to campus is currently $3.65. Secure bike racks placed around campus
would encourage students to commute by bike.
An explanation of the background shows your reader that you have a grasp
of the problem. In addition, the introduction may explain the need for a
solution. Some readers may ask, “Why not simply leave things as they are?”
For these readers, note the effects of ignoring the problem.
The introduction also explains how you or other personnel are qualifi ed
to solve the problem. In addition, you might describe where you will
seek information to help you solve the problem. Data sources could be
printed materials (for example, books, reports, or brochures), interviews,
observations, or experiments. The introduction also might defi ne the
scope, or the extent to which you will search for solutions, as well as any
limitations, or boundaries, of the project (for example, restrictions on time,
space, equipment, money, or staff).
Image Source/Getty Images
336 | Chapter 14
Drafting the Conclusion
The conclusion should be straightforward and brief. It might include a
summary of key points, such as those noted in the summary section, and it
should call for the audience to take action. Make the call to action specifi c
and clear, including dates, deadlines, and amounts.
Explore the Composing Strategies with a Model
Consider a sample problem to illustrate the composing process: Chaya
Sotelo, a graduate of Martinique College, has noticed that the online
newsletter, The Martinique, contains little information about the careers
Drafting the Body
After you have described the problem and solution in the introduction, you
use the body of the informal proposal to become more specifi c about your
plan. The specifi c details—facts, fi gures, statistics, dates, locations, and
costs—are the materials you use to persuade your audience. For this section,
you address only the topics in Table 14.4 that you and your readers need.
Table 14.4
Methods
Explain your methodology—what your approach to the prob-
lem will be, what criteria (perhaps from the RFP) you will meet,
and what outcome or product you will deliver at the date you
specify. Justify your plan of work and any exceptions to the
RFP as needed.
Scheduling
Present a calendar of the work planned and expected comple-
tion dates to assure your audience that you anticipate efficiency.
Effectively illustrate scheduling as appropriate. Flowcharts or
timelines are excellent for visual presentation of timetables.
List numbers and qualifications of personnel.
Describe facilities (both available and needed) to be used.
Capabilities
Assure your audience that you can deliver the work you
propose by (1) noting the abilities of people involved and
(2) describing your organization’s successful track record.
Materials and
Equipment
Review materials and equipment to be used. This section is
particularly important in scientific projects and construction
projects.
Expected Results
Explain what you think the result of your work will be.
Plan for Evaluating
Results
Outline your plan for evaluating the success of the solution
once it is implemented.
Feasibility
Explain how you find the solution reasonable to implement.
Budget
Present (typically in a table) the costs for the work, including
salaries, equipment, materials, travel, communication,
services, and other expenses.
Justification
Explain clearly and persuasively the reason for any expenses
your audience may question.
Proposals | 337
and lives of alumni. Occasionally, the newsletter carries a brief report
about a former student who has gone on to be quite successful, but
she would like to see stories about the careers of “everyday” alumni too.
You will follow Chaya through the process of writing a short informal
proposal to the editor, in which she suggests a solution. Chaya decides
to write the summary last, pulling ideas for the summary from the
proposal.
To help the editor understand the problem, Chaya considers the “why”
question. She writes a clear statement of the problem: Except for occasional
brief reports, no news about the careers and lives of Martinique College
alumni appears in the online newsletter The Martinique. Then she lists
her goals, as follows:
Include specifi c features on alumni and their chosen careers.
◾
Include general news about alumni.
◾
Report on alumni who deserve attention for their career achievements.
◾
Provide a forum for alumni.
◾
Encourage more alumni to read the website.
◾
Chaya brainstorms several solutions to meet these goals: (1) Develop a
link on the website for alumni to submit personal and career information,
(2) request that alumni be given space for contributions, and (3) ask The
Martinique to cover alumni news in a more comprehensive manner.
Chaya moves from brainstorming to analysis. For each solution she
developed, she lists positives and negatives. For example, for the fi rst
solution, developing links on the website, she lists the following:
Positive
Negative
Alumni would be able to highlight positive
Would enough alumni be interested?
aspects of graduating from Martinique.
Alumni and students would be able to
Would alumni be willing to
network.
participate?
Alumni would read and support their
Would alumni read the website and
website.
support its sponsors?
Chaya realizes that her proposal is directed to an editor, Gina Hollinger, who
is interested in the effects of Chaya’s proposed action on Ms. Hollinger’s work:
profi ts, personnel, schedule, and image. Chaya knows that a solid plan with
accurate facts and fi gures is necessary to convince her reader. After choosing
the plan with the most “positives” and the least “negatives,” she again
brainstorms ideas to include in the body of her proposal.
Chaya decides that the best solution is to include an article in the quarterly
online newsletter The Martinique. She must assure Ms. Hollinger of a sound
plan for implementing this idea. Chaya explains the specifi cs of her idea and
proposes how the work will be done. To make the work process clear, she
develops a chart that shows each step in the development of the feature. The
chart identifi es who or what is responsible for each phase. Chaya uses this
chart to check for steps she might have overlooked.
338 | Chapter 14
Chaya prepares to write her conclusion by reviewing her strongest selling
points. She knows that her closing should include a summary of key points
and make a call to action. Chaya presents the benefi ts of including a new
alumni-generated column in The Martinique and asks Ms. Hollinger to
consider adding the new feature to the quarterly online newsletter. Chaya
also offers to volunteer if the proposal is accepted. In addition, she provides
her contact with information that makes it easier for Ms. Hollinger to
respond to the proposal. Read Chaya’s fi nal two-page draft in Figure 14.2.
Figure 14.2 Informal Proposal for an External Audience
Proposals | 339
STOP AND THINK
In a large organization, different people are likely to read only the sections of
a proposal relating to their area of expertise. Name the sections the following
employees might read: a chief executive officer (CEO), a technical expert, and a
comptroller (financial officer).
Figure 14.2 Informal Proposal for an External Audience, cont.
Fi
I f
l P
l f
E
l A di
340 | Chapter 14
COMPOSING FORMAL PROPOSALS
The preceding section of this chapter presented information about informal
proposals. Informal and formal proposals are similar. Both are persuasive
documents that offer the writers’ answers to the readers’ problems or needs.
In both proposals, writers choose from the same optional subsections in the
same order under the headings Introduction, Body, and Conclusion.
Formal proposals may differ from informal proposals in the following
ways:
Tone, such as the detached, professional voice writers might use with a
◾
high-level offi cial
Additional parts of the report, such as the glossary, appendixes, and
◾
transmittal correspondence
Complexity of the outcome, such as the construction of a new building or
◾
the $2 billion purchase of jet airliners
Although formal proposals are not used as frequently as informal proposals,
they are called for in many circumstances. The following examples are
typical:
A marine biologist, disturbed by the fi sh kills in a local estuarine system,
◾
wants to study the effect of municipal wastewater dumping on the fi sh.
The biologist seeks funds from the State Department of Fish and Wildlife
for a fi ve-year project.
The owner of a Montessori preschool receives an RFP from a local
◾
assisted-living center to open a branch of the preschool at the center.
A mechanic in a ball-bearing plant is inspired to improve the precision
◾
of a robotic welding machine after studying similar machines at another
facility. Having decided on the adjustments needed and the cost in work
hours and materials, the mechanic requests approval from her manager.
As you read about formal proposals, look at the sample formal proposal in
Figure 14.3, starting on page 346.
Prewriting
Prewriting techniques should help you plan to write a formal proposal.
During the prewriting phase, you collect and organize data and determine
your objectives. Because a formal proposal is often longer and more involved
than other technical reports, prewriting is especially important.
Planning for Persuasion
The readers of formal proposals need to be convinced, as a salesperson
convinces a customer. If you are to be a successful proposal writer, you must
address your audience effectively and prevent any skepticism. Here are some
guidelines for convincing your audience.
Collect as many facts as you can to support your proposed plan.
◾
Be accurate. Plan to check your data. If your reader discovers a
◾
discrepancy, an exaggeration, or a mistake, you lose credibility.
Select three textbooks and
examine them to determine
the parts that make up
each book. Make a list of
the elements you ﬁ nd. For
example, how does the book
begin? Is the ﬁ rst element
a title page or a note to the
reader?
WARM UP
Proposals | 341
Study your audience and the situation so you understand the reader’s
◾
point of view. Planning with an understanding of the reader allows you
to write a more convincing proposal.
Be realistic in your planning. Do not propose to do a job in two weeks to
◾
make a sale when you honestly believe the work will take a month. You
may suffer the consequences later because your proposal becomes a legal
document when it is accepted.
Planning for Integration
Another goal of prewriting the formal proposal is planning for integration.
The entire document must come together as a logical whole. The description
of the problem, for example, will affect how the reader views the effectiveness
of the solution. When different writers are composing different sections, a
primary writer or editor should plan and edit the entire report for consistency.
Planning for Graphics, Definitions, and Supplemental Materials
As you gather data, consider whether a graphic would help your audience
understand the information. Then decide what type of graphic aid will most
clearly depict the idea (for example, a pie graph, a diagram, or a bar graph).
Plan what terms you will use and whether your readers will need defi nitions
for them. If the proposal needs defi nitions, decide whether you serve your
audience better by placing the defi nitions in the report or in a glossary at the
end of the report. If you need to provide only a few defi nitions, it may be easier
for you to include defi nitions in the text. (Your reader will probably fi nd that
arrangement easier to use as well.) However, proposals that require numerous
defi nitions should probably contain a glossary after the body of the report.
In addition to graphics and defi nitions, think about materials you might like
your readers to have access to but do not want to include in the body of the
A team of employees at Blue Vale Packing worked for two months on a sales
proposal to a major national mail-order company. The proposal offered to
supply all foam packaging materials for the business. Because this proposal
could represent a major portion of Blue Vale’s business, the team worked
diligently to develop and present the best plan possible. However, a serious
problem arose that the team had not anticipated. Most sales proposals must be
approved and signed by someone in an executive position in the organization.
The team scheduled time for researching, prewriting, composing, and editing
before the submission deadline. What they did not anticipate was that the
president of Blue Vale was leaving on a four-week business trip ten days before
the due date. Therefore, the president would not be available to approve or sign
the proposal in time to meet the submission deadline.
Think Critically
What could the team do? Could they salvage the situation and meet the
submission deadline? If so, how?
Communication
Dilemma
342 | Chapter 14
proposal. Consider placing relevant but not essential materials in an
appendix (material that you want readers to have access to but that is not
a primary part of the proposal). For example, if you used the results of a
questionnaire in your proposal, you may want to show interested readers
how you gathered data by including the questionnaire as an appendix. You
can read more about appendixes on page 345.
Parts of Formal Proposals
The format of formal proposals is designed to aid the readers. Each formal
proposal follows the same basic plan so that readers and writers know what
to expect and where to fi nd the information they seek. Remember, many
expert readers review only one or two sections of a formal proposal.
The parts listed below make up the formal proposal. Those parts with an
asterisk (*) are used in informal proposals as well.
Letter or Memo of Transmittal
Body (or Discussion)*
Title Page
Conclusion (or Summary)*
Table of Contents
Glossary
List of Illustrations
Appendixes
Executive Summary (or Abstract)*
Works Cited
Introduction*
Letter or Memo of Transmittal
The letter or memo of transmittal is similar to the cover letter that is mailed
with a resume. It is an offi cial greeting and an introduction of the document
to the reader. Write a letter to accompany a proposal when you are addressing
an external audience and a memo when you are addressing an internal
audience. Key the letter or memo using acceptable formatting guidelines.
Because the message is usually good news for the audience, this letter or
memo uses the direct strategy, as follows:
1. Begin with the purpose, the fact that you are submitting a proposal. Name
the proposal topic and explain whether you are responding to an RFP,
responding to a request, or initiating the proposal on your own.
2. Note areas of special interest to the reader.
3. Thank the audience for reviewing the proposal. You may offer to provide
more information or answer questions.
The letter or memo of transmittal is usually written last, after the proposal.
Title Page
The title page of a formal proposal, like a book cover, gives the reader
important information about the document. In designing the title page, use
white space to make the page attractive. Be clear, accurate, complete, and
precise in composing the title page. Provide the following:
A descriptive title of the proposal
◾
The name of the company or companies involved
◾
Proposals | 343
The names of the writers
◾
The date the proposal is being submitted
◾
As part of the title page, some internal proposals have a routing list of
readers who will review the document.
Note that a precise title such as Proposal to Develop a Policy Governing
Substitute Staffi ng for Absentee Technicians in the Fiber Twist Area or
Proposal to Purchase and Install the Evermorr Secure 3120 Security System in
Glynndale Condominiums is useful because it gives readers more information
than a vague title such as Proposal to Deal with Absent Workers or Proposal
to Improve Security in Glynndale Condominiums.
Table of Contents
The table of contents should be designed so that it is attractive, easy to
read, and clear. The table of contents may appear alone on a page or on
the same page with the list of illustrations, which appears at
the bottom. The words Table of Contents in all capital letters
should be boldfaced and centered at the top of the page. The
list of contents should start at the left margin under the title
and visually demonstrate relationships between ideas. Typically,
section headings are fl ush with the left margin and subheadings
are indented underneath.
Enter headings and subheadings on the left side of the page,
pagination (the arrangement of page numbers) on the right side
of the page, and leaders (periods) between each heading and its
page number.
List of Illustrations Begin with the words List of Illustrations
(using initial caps and bold-faced type) at the left margin
under the last entry in the table of contents. Under the title,
provide the label, number, and descriptive title of the graphic
on the left and the page on which the illustration is located on
the right.
Executive Summary (or Abstract)
Centered at the top of the page, key the words Executive
Summary or Abstract (in all capital letters and boldfaced type).
The executive summary is usually two to four paragraphs on a page by itself.
Write the executive summary after you fi nish the rest of the report. Keep
the reader in mind while you compose it. This section, as the title Executive
Summary implies, is designed with the administrator in mind. Busy
executives want the story quickly and want only the essential information:
the problem, the solution, and the benefi ts of the solution. Because these
readers are concerned with the big picture, the overall health of the
organization, they may not read the specifi c information in the body of the
proposal, only the summary. However, proposal writers should plan the
summary for all readers, not just executives.
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Word processing software has features to
aid in creating a formal proposal, such as
a feature to create a table of contents and
styles for each section of the proposal. If you
are working on a group proposal, you can
create a master document as the template for
the proposal. Drafts can be circulated among
the team members, with editorial changes
and comments marked in the drafts.
Think Critically
Create a document with heading styles (or
add headings to an existing document) and
generate a table of contents. Explore diﬀ erent
ways to format the table of contents.
Complete the Composing
and Formatting a Title
Page worksheet available at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 14; then click
Data Files.
344 | Chapter 14
Introduction, Body of Discussion, and Conclusion
In long reports (perhaps 20 pages or more), each major section heading may
begin a new, separate part of the formal proposal. Each section starts on a
new page with the heading name, such as Introduction, in all capital letters
and boldfaced type centered at the top of the page. In shorter reports, the
entire body may fl ow from one section to another without page breaks.
The Introduction The introduction is the framework that prepares readers
for the body of the proposal. The introduction answers the questions what
and why. No matter which subparts of the introduction you include in
your document, clearly state for your readers the problem and a solution
or alternative solutions. If you determine that the readers need background
information, summarize the situation and the proposer’s qualifi cations.
Include information about your company and personnel that will enhance
the credibility of your proposal, such as the number of years in business,
staff and equipment resources, previous clients, and success with similar
projects. Because any reader may read the introductory material, remember to
communicate in a way that administrators, managers, technical experts, and
fi nancial managers can understand. Introductions should be strong and clear,
in which case people are likely to read them. In addition, by coming at the
beginning of the proposal, introductions make an important fi rst impression.
The Body of Discussion If the introduction sets the framework of ideas,
the body of a formal proposal is the crux of the argument, the specifi cs of
persuasion. In the body, you explain how the technical data prove that your
idea (solution) will work. Describe methods for carrying out the project,
specifi c tasks, time schedules, personnel, facilities, and equipment. You
could include an organizational chart of people working on the project so
the reader will know who is responsible for particular areas. In addition to
outlining what you will do, these specifi c details convince the reader that
your approach is best for the situation. The project’s budget should clearly
show and perhaps justify the costs. The graphics you have planned should
enhance the text of your proposal, not take the place of the text.
Furthermore, keep in mind that the body of the proposal is most often read
by technical experts, who have the skills and ability to understand the
detailed technical information. These readers expect precise, accurate, and
up-to-date information.
The Conclusion Be concise and direct when you write the conclusion of
your formal proposal. You have already provided the information to sway
your audience to your point of view. This is not the time to add to a sales
pitch—or any new information that belongs in the body of the proposal.
Instead, summarize your most convincing points regarding the importance of
the project and the benefi ts of the solution. Then suggest a course of action.
Glossary
If you include a glossary, design it to be easy to read. In the text of the
proposal, designate words appearing in the glossary using asterisks, italics,
or another highlighting technique. Include a footnote or parenthetical note
beside the fi rst entry telling readers they can fi nd defi nitions in the glossary.
Complete the Revising
Glossary Entries worksheet
available at www.cengage.
com/school/bcomm/techwtg.
Click the link for Chapter 14;
then click Data Files.
Proposals | 345
At the top of the glossary page, center the title Glossary (in all capital letters
and boldfaced type). Make the entry word—the word being defi ned—stand
out by using boldface or columns. When using columns, place the entry
words on the left and defi nitions on the right. Alphabetize all words,
acronyms, and symbols, as dictionaries do.
Consider the needs of your readers when you choose the words to defi ne and
determine the extent of the defi nitions. Do not defi ne words the audience
already understands. At the same time, if several people will read your
proposal, defi ne a term even if you think that only one reader will need the
defi nition. Avoid overly technical defi nitions (unless you are writing a highly
technical proposal for an audience that is familiar with the vocabulary used
in the proposal). Use language the readers will understand and consider
including graphic aids if they will help readers understand the proposal.
Works Cited
If your proposal uses ideas or text from a source you need to credit, prepare
works cited or documentation pages according to the guidelines of the style
manual you are using. Consult the style manual your organization or the
RFP requires and follow it precisely.
Appendixes
An appendix is material you want readers to have access to but that is not
a primary part of the proposal. In the body of the proposal, where the topic
an appendix supports is mentioned, refer readers to the appendix, as in “See
Appendix C.” Each appendix is labeled with the word Appendix and given a
letter or number and a descriptive title, similar to the system for identifying
graphics. Put every document in a separate appendix.
Page Numbers
Assigning page numbers for formal proposals works the same as pagination
in books. Prefatory material, or material placed before the actual
report begins, is numbered with lowercase Roman numerals. Prefatory
material includes a letter or memo of transmittal, a title page, and a table of
contents.
The fi rst two pages, the letter or memo of transmittal and the title page,
are not numbered. The table of contents, the third prefatory page, is
numbered iii. The fi rst page, which usually begins with the Executive
Summary, is not numbered. Place an Arabic number 2 on the next page.
(In other words, 2 is the fi rst Arabic page number because the fi rst page
of the body is not numbered.) Number the rest of the document with
Arabic numerals in sequence. Center page numbers at the bottom or
in the upper right corner of the page.
STOP AND THINK
Who reads the executive summary, or abstract, of a formal proposal? Where
should terms be defined in a formal proposal?
346 | Chapter 14
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal
TO:
Barkley Wolfe, Manager
Eastbrook Shopping Center
FROM:
Delores Ondecko, Chief of Operaons
DO
DATE:
November 23, 20—
SUBJECT:
Proposal for Improving Exterior Lighng at Eastbrook
I am subming for your review my department’s proposal to upgrade the exterior lighng system at
Eastbrook Shopping Center. This document responds to our October 15, 20—, tenants’ meeng and
subsequent discussions with you regarding safety on the property.
Of special note are the following secons addressing quesons you or our tenants brought up:
Customer atudes (in Figure 1) .................................................. 2
Standard illuminaon levels (Methods) ...................................... 3
Cost esmate ............................................................................... 5
Thank you for reviewing our data and suggesons. We look forward to your response. If you decide to
accept our proposal, we are eager to implement the needed changes.
Proposals | 347
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
PROPOSAL FOR IMPROVED EXTERIOR LIGHTING
AT EASTBROOK SHOPPING CENTER
Prepared for
Barkley Wolfe, Manager
Eastbrook Shopping Center
Prepared by
Delores Ondecko, Chief of Operaons
November 23, 20—
348 | Chapter 14
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
Proposals | 349
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
350 | Chapter 14
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
Proposals | 351
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
352 | Chapter 14
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
KEY
Proposals | 353
Scheduling
We would like to make the suggested improvements as soon as possible. Once equipment has been
ordered and received, the project should take less than two weeks, as you can see in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Schedule for Improving Eastbrook’s Exterior Lighng
The installaon of the ﬁve new poles according to IES guidelines will require an outside contractor.
Edison Electric has the special equipment needed and can install the poles in one week. Because we do
not have the cherry picker required to do this job, the ulies company also will need to replace our
150-wa bulbs with the new 400-wa bulbs. This task should take no more than one day. Three
members of our maintenance staﬀ can install the six wall-mount lights in less than one day. The enre
project should be complete and lighng improved within a month.
Materials and Equipment
We can purchase the 400-wa bulbs from our current supplier, Witherspoon Inc., for only $10 per unit
more than we are paying now for the 150-wa bulbs. Moreover, Witherspoon will exchange our current
stock of 150-wa bulbs for 400-wa bulbs.
Edison Electric will order the materials and erect the ﬁve new poles we need. We should contract with
Edison to service the pole lights because we do not own the equipment to do so ourselves.
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
354 | Chapter 14
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
Proposals | 355
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
356 | Chapter 14
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
Proposals | 357
Figure 14.3 Formal Proposal, cont.
358 | Chapter 14
Chapter 14
Review
SUMMARY
1. Proposals are persuasive documents that suggest a solution to a
problem or a change.
2. Proposals are defi ned and categorized according to the audience
and their needs: internal or external; informal or formal; solicited or
unsolicited; sales, research, planning, or grant.
3. Proposals are in memo, letter, or manuscript format, the choice
determined by the audience and the complexity of the proposal.
4. The introduction identifi es the problem and offers a solution, along
with any background information the audience might fi nd helpful.
The body uses facts, fi gures, statistics, graphics, and other evidence
to convince readers to accept the solution or change. The conclusion
restates key points and calls on the audience to take action.
5. Formal proposals contain many special parts that have unique
formatting guidelines. These parts may include a letter or memo of
transmittal, a title page, a table of contents, a list of illustrations,
an executive summary (or abstract), an introduction, a body (or
discussion), a conclusion (or summary), a glossary, appendixes, and a
works cited section or bibliography.
Checklist
Have I identifi ed the problem I want to see resolved?
◾
Have I analyzed my audience and then listed the audience’s needs?
◾
Have I brainstormed alternate solutions? Have I listed positives and
◾
negatives for each solution on my list?
Have I thought about and listed my goals?
◾
Have I explained the problem clearly in the introduction?
◾
Does the body give readers enough information to make a decision?
◾
Have I provided enough evidence, such as facts, fi gures, and testimony?
◾
Does my conclusion contain the most important ideas from the proposal?
◾
Does it call for action from the readers?
Have I made information easy to use with headings and subheadings?
◾
If I am writing a formal proposal, have I included all of the parts that are
◾
needed?
Proposals | 359
Build Your Foundation
1. Interview an employee about a particular problem as well as the solution
for which he or she was responsible. Write a description of the problem, the
methods the employee used to solve the problem, the effectiveness of the
solution, and the employee’s (and employer’s) satisfaction with the work.
2. Use library research to learn more about a great problem solver or
innovator (for example, Thomas Edison, Mother Theresa, Albert
Einstein, Eleanor Roosevelt, or Jonas Salk). Find out as much as you can
about the methods the person used in seeking solutions. Give an oral
presentation of your fi ndings to your class.
3. Interview a proposal writer to fi nd out how his or her company uses
formal proposals, who else in the writer’s organization writes proposals,
and how successful the proposals have been. Ask what this writer thinks
is essential in preparing an effective formal proposal.
4. Use the Internet, regional or state newspapers, or professional journals
to search for requests for proposals.
a. Copy the RFPs and bring them to class for discussion.
b. From a careful reading of one RFP, identify the problem or need.
c. Identify the audience the proposal writer needs to address.
d. Brainstorm a list of ideas to include in the proposal’s introduction.
5. Prepare a list of glossary terms for the RFP you read in item 4. If the RFP
has a glossary, evaluate it for completeness. Identify any terms the writer
omitted that are unfamiliar to you. Research and defi ne the terms.
6. Choose two problems for which you would consider proposing a
solution. Write one or two paragraphs describing the problem and the
decision maker (audience) for each problem.
7. For item 6, list possible solutions to each problem or need you identifi ed.
8. Using a problem whose solution has already been implemented, re-
create the thinking process that the proposal writers might have used by:
a. Developing a list of positive and negative aspects of the solution.
b. Creating a list showing how the solution meets the needs of the
audience or solves the problem.
9. Read or listen to the international news for one week. Pick an issue and
write a statement of the problem. Brainstorm at least four solutions and
list the positives and negatives of the two most realistic solutions.
10. Critique a proposal from business or industry. Analyze how the writers
met (or did not meet) the needs of the audience. Review the proposal’s
formatting features. Determine its organizational patterns. Share the
results of your critique orally or in an essay.
11. Have you heard the saying “Every problem used to be a solution”?
Everyone involved in the U.S. health care debate acknowledges that the
current employer-based insurance system has its problems. Research
the origins of the current system and put yourself in the shoes of those
decision makers from long ago. Use your imagination to list several
alternatives they may have brainstormed. Then make a list of what you
think they considered to be the positives and negatives of the system
360 | Chapter 14
they eventually chose. Make sure you analyze the situation from the
earlier point of view, when the current employer-based health insurance
system was selected as the best choice.
Your Turn
12. Write a proposal convincing your parents or guardians to take you (or
to allow you to go with friends) on the vacation of your dreams. Identify
the problem, explain the solution, convince them of the reasonableness
of your plan, and justify the cost by preparing a budget.
13. Imagine that you asked your parents or guardians for a car. They said,
“Yes, but. . . .” Your responsibility will be to pay for insurance, gas, and
maintenance if they buy this car for you. In an informal proposal:
a. Explain the type of car you want and why you want it.
b. Describe how you will pay for the car’s expenses if you do not have
money and your parents or guardians do not want you to work more
than ten hours a week, as would be required at a restaurant, grocery
store, or department store. Identify your problem and consider
alternative solutions. Be creative. Think of ways you can earn money
other than by holding a regular job. List as many options as you can.
c. Write the solution you would propose to your parents or guardians.
14. With a group of classmates who share your interests, write a formal proposal
to solve a specifi c problem. Identify a problem at school, at work, or in the
community that must be dealt with by decision makers distant from you on
the organizational ladder (for example, a superintendent, president, dean,
or member of the board of trustees). Your proposal should require some
research. Your internal formal proposal should include the following:
a. Transmittal letter or memorandum
b. Executive summary
c. Introduction
d. Body, including suffi cient details for an informed decision, timeline or
schedule, appropriate visuals, and a budget if costs are involved
e. Conclusion, including a specifi c call to action
Here are examples of problems to solve.
School
Work
Community
new or improved equipment
equipment or work space
sidewalks and bike paths
access to the computer lab
wages or department budget
zoning or use of land
snack bar
improved working conditions
street/traffic signs
new club or sport
sponsorship of team sports
access for people with disabilities
to neighborhood stores
needed programs
insurance and benefits
street and park lighting
15. Write an informal sales proposal to Karyn Grissom, owner of Mason
Offi ce Center. As owner of Green Thumb Planting, an indoor plant
service, you are asking Ms. Grissom to become a new client. After visiting
the offi ce complex, you determine that the building could use 31 large
and 14 medium-sized low-light plants. Your service provides plants and
Proposals | 361
pots, weekly maintenance, and monthly replacement of sickly plants. If
Ms. Grissom accepts your proposal, you can install the plantings within
one week. For your service, she will pay a $350 installation fee and a $35
maintenance fee each month thereafter. Your proposal should persuade
her to sign a service contract. Create and use any additional details or
graphics you need to prepare an effective document.
Community Connection
16. Visit a nonprofi t organization in your community to learn about the
procedures and processes used there. Explain to your contact at the
nonprofi t that you are studying proposals for this class and ask if he or
she can help you practice some of the prewriting steps for a proposal.
Ask your contact to select an issue that he or she would like to apply for
grant money to solve. Following the process that Chaya Sotelo used to
prepare her proposal, starting on page 336, do the following:
a. List the goals for the proposal (the things the organization would like
to have happen as a result of getting the grant).
b. Brainstorm different ways to meet these goals.
c. Analyze each possible solution by listing its positives and negatives.
Offer to share your document with the organization and make sure you
thank everyone with whom you worked for his or her time—while you
are there and afterwards—by sending a written thank-you note.
17. Identify a local government agency whose work involves proposals. For
example, your town or city government‘s Public Works Department might
publish RFPs or RFBs (requests for bids) seeking proposals or bids for
pending construction projects. Or the Health Department might issue RFPs
to select the best contractor for providing substance abuse counseling in the
community. Ask for copies of RFPs and, if possible, interview the writer(s).
a. Write a brief narrative after your interview with the RFP writer(s)
to explain to your instructor and classmates how the professional(s)
develop RFPs. Explain who contributes information and how the fi nal
document is approved for publication.
b. Share the RFPs with your class. Use them to identify criteria requested
by the issuing agency in the proposal. In other words, what factors
does the agency want to see covered in the proposals to solve the
problem or fi ll the need?
18. Schedule an appointment to meet with a professional grant writer, perhaps
at school or at a local nonprofi t organization. Ask for permission to review
a recently funded or approved grant. Using the guidelines in this chapter,
explain in a brief essay the factors that led to the grant’s success.
19. In teams of three to fi ve class members, identify a local organization
that could have a stronger presence on your campus. Perhaps a local
ice cream shop could open a kiosk. Or a smoking cessation group
might run a semester-long program. Develop a proposal addressed to
the appropriate decision maker at your school in which you attempt to
persuade him or her to approve your plan. Remember to analyze your
audience carefully, considering any reservations or negative history he
or she might have regarding the plan.
362 | Chapter 15
Ethics in the Workplace
Chapter
Focus on the Ethics in the Workplace
Read the ethical principles on the next page and answer these questions:
Why does the Society for Technical Communication (STC) list the six core
•
values in this order?
What are fi ve things technical communicators can do to practice honesty?
•
How can technical communicators maintain professionalism?
•
Why do the principles include confi dentiality?
•
What If?
The principles were being explained to students considering a career as a
•
technical communicator?
Technical communicators needed STC guidelines for writing blogs and text
•
for web pages?
A banking or fi nance industry wanted to use similar principles?
•
Goals
Explain what it means to act ethically
◾
Describe a culture of ethics
◾
Develop a plan for resolving an
◾
ethical dilemma
Understand the barriers to ethical
◾
behavior
Terms
code of ethics, p. 369
◾
corporate code of ethics,
◾
p. 369
dignity, p. 375
◾
ethics, p. 365
◾
personal code of ethics, p. 370
◾
principles, p. 365
◾
rights, p. 375
◾
utility, p. 375
◾
values, p. 365
◾
whistle-blower,
◾
p. 377
WRITE TO LEARN
Think of someone you admire and respect, someone you want to be
like—a parent, friend, teacher, or political or entertainment fi gure. What, in
particular, has this person done to earn your respect? If you were to ask this
person what values—for example, honesty, hard work, and courage—are
important, what would he or she say? Write a journal entry describing this
person and naming some of his or her accomplishments. Summarize by
identifying which values are important to this individual.
Ethics in the Workplace | 363
Ethical Principles for Technical Communicators
Reprinted with permission of STC
364 | Chapter 15
Writing@Work
Rick Leuner is a sales associate for
NAI Realvest, a commercial real estate
brokerage firm in Orlando, Florida. He
helps companies find and purchase or
lease large facilities to serve as offices,
stores, and warehouses. He also looks for buyers or lessees for
commercial spaces that are being built or have been vacated in his
territory.
In general, Rick is bound by real estate ethics codes implemented at
local, state, and national levels. “Members of the National Association
of Realtors (NAR) are required to periodically pass a test on the NAR
Code of Ethics, a document that spells out the ethical practices one
must use with other realtors, clients, and the public. I also follow regulations
and legal requirements set by Florida state regulators. These rules have the
force of law for any person practicing real estate in Florida.”
In Rick’s field—and many others—ethical behavior draws more business
opportunities. Therefore, it is beneficial to observe proper business decorum.
“Our industry relies greatly on networking with fellow professionals to close
deals. Referrals are an important source of business, and brokers frequently
refer clients to their most respected colleagues when they know that all parties
will benefit. This process of referral creates a web of goodwill between peers
and encourages brokers to earn a positive reputation and share their business
in the future.”
In addition to helping his colleagues, Rick protects his clients’ confidential
information. “I need to understand their detailed business requirements to
provide the best real estate service and advice,” explains Rick. “Businesspeople
do not readily reveal this proprietary information to outsiders, so I must earn
my clients’ trust and respect their desire for confidentiality. Whether this
is guaranteed through nondisclosure agreements or with a handshake, the
promise is the foundation for a respectful, successful business relationship.”
Think Critically
1. In Rick’s field, why does ethical behavior draw more business opportunities?
2. Think about two career fields with which you are familiar. Is networking as
important in these fields as it is in commercial real estate? What are some
of the confidentiality issues in these fields?
Printed with permission of Rick Leuner
Courtesy of Rick Leuner
Ethics in the Workplace | 365
What kinds of quick ethical
decisions must you make as
you go through your day?
Warm Up
WHAT IS ETHICS?
The principles and values that help people resolve questions of right and
wrong make up their ethics. A system of ethics, or morality, is based on
values, the ideals that govern a person’s actions. Many people have similar
values—believing in honesty, justice, hard work,
and equality, for example. Values help people
set rules, or principles, to guide their behavior.
When you make a decision to return a $10 bill to
a stranger who unknowingly dropped it, you are
making an ethical decision. Your honesty motivates
you to return the money to its owner rather than
keep it for yourself.
People’s ethics come initially from their families
and culture, where they may have learned the
Golden Rule: Do unto others as you would have
them do unto you. Also, the world’s great religions
contain moral systems of conduct by which
people are encouraged to live: do not kill, do not
steal, and do not lie. As people mature, many of
them reassess the moral code passed down to
them, revising it according to their experiences.
For example, a youngster taught not to kill may
reassess that lesson if, as a young adult, this person
is asked to defend his or her country.
Benefits of Ethical Decisions
Living ethically allows people to reap the
consequences of their behavior—such as gaining
the respect of others and having access to the
privileges of society. Responsible and ethical people
get to vote, borrow money, serve in public offi ce,
and travel freely. Acting ethically:
Helps a person live amicably and responsibly with other human beings.
◾
Keeps an individual’s conscience clear and provides peace of mind.
◾
Defi nes a person’s character, showing what kind of person he or she is.
◾
Mitch is a pharmacy technician at Fullterton’s. As he was organizing
prescriptions for pickup, he saw one for Antabuse, a medication that helps
alcoholics control the compulsion to drink. The prescription was for the high
school principal, who suspended Mitch several years ago when, according
to Mitch, he did not deserve it. Mitch is tempted to tell his wife about the
prescription. He knows she can keep a secret.
Mitch decided not to say anything to his wife that evening. And
coincidentally, the next day he happened to run into the principal.
Although Mitch felt somewhat self-conscious, he greeted the man with a
clear conscience. That afternoon Mitch went to work, feeling good about
himself. He was not the type of person who had to spread a juicy story to get
attention from others.
Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images
366 | Chapter 15
Consequences of
Unethical Behavior
When people do not behave ethically, they
are subject to the pitfalls that are the result of
their poor judgment—possible convictions,
questionable reputations, and guilt. Unethical
behavior affects not only an individual
personally, but also family members and
members of society who must deal with the
consequences.
At work one afternoon, Mitch thought through
the consequences of telling his wife about
the principal’s prescription. First, he liked his
job and knew he could be fi red for a breach
of confi dentiality. Second, he considered the
consequences if prescriptions of other customers
were revealed. Mitch’s sister, who takes an
antidepressant, would be terribly embarrassed
if anyone except her family knew. Third, he
realized his motive—revenge against someone
he thought had done him an injustice—was
immature. If only more people like Mitch would
stop to think through the consequences of their
actions and examine their motives!
In the highly publicized 2001 Enron scandal,
investors lost huge sums of money, thousands
of workers lost their jobs and retirement
money, the former chief fi nancial offi cer
Andrew Fastow faced a prison sentence, and
the public lost confi dence in big business.
What was the motive for falsifying fi nancial records on such a
large scale? In retrospect, what would the leaders of Enron say
now that they have seen the full consequences of their actions?
Like Mitch, everyone faces the temptation to do wrong, to take the
easy way out, or to give in to a malicious impulse. Unlike Mitch,
not everyone takes the time to reason through the implications
of a choice. The Enron incident illustrates that consequences of
unethical behavior can be far reaching and long lasting. The recent
economic downturn of 2009 was due in large part to the practice
of some fi nancial institutions loaning money for overvalued
houses to people who could not repay the loans and to consumers
who lived beyond their means. The consequences of those choices
will affect people’s lives for years to come.
Diego Cervo, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
TYPICAL CITIZEN,
CUSTOMER, CLIENT
Wants to be treated with fairness, honesty,
respect, and consideration.
WRITER’S FOCUS
Developing codes of ethics that publicize in-
tentions to behave ethically and internalizing
those codes so ethical behavior is automatic.
STOP AND THINK
Define ethics. What are the benefits of living an ethical life? What are the
consequences of making poor ethical decisions?
Ethics in the Workplace | 367
CREATING A CULTURE OF ETHICS
The Ethical Resource Center’s 2007 National Business Ethics Survey provides
some disturbing news. Over half of the employees questioned saw someone
involved in an ethical violation, and most hesitated to report a violation
because of fear of reprisals (Harned).
To encourage their employees to act ethically, companies can create a culture of
ethics, a climate that supports integrity, mutual respect, and fair-mindedness.
In such a climate, everyone knows that values matter. To create such an ethical
culture, leaders must set the example and actively promote ethical behavior.
Ethical Leaders
In 1982, when Tylenol represented 15 percent of Johnson & Johnson’s
profi ts, someone found a way to lace Tylenol with cyanide. As a result of
the tampering, seven people died. Even though the company did not cause
the deaths, the public stopped purchasing Tylenol. As a result, Johnson &
Johnson’s market share lost $1 billion (Baker).
In 1986, Johnson & Johnson faced a similar threat of tampering. This time
the company wasted no time in removing Tylenol from store shelves. The
company decided not to make Tylenol available to consumers until it solved
the packaging problem by producing a tamper-free cap. As a result, the public
learned it that could trust Johnson & Johnson to do the right thing. Within
fi ve months, the company had recovered most of its market share.
Johnson & Johnson is a good example of a company that acted ethically. One
reason the company quickly chose to do what was best for its customers
was its culture of ethics. When the question was posed—Do we recall our
product?—there was no doubt the recall was the right thing to do. On the
next page, Figure 15.1 shows Johnson & Johnson’s Credo of Values. Written
in 1943, it made a commitment to the company’s customers. Chairman James
Burke’s leadership during the Tylenol crisis reestablished that commitment.
The experience at Johnson & Johnson underscores one of the principal
fi ndings of the Ethics Resource Center’s 2000 National Business Ethics
Survey: Leaders who model positive ethical behavior affect the ethical
climates of the institutions they run. Managers, supervisors, and
coworkers who set good examples
mean that other employees are
more likely to make appropriate
moral choices. Employees who
perceive their leaders as moral
beings:
Feel less pressure to compro mise
◾
ethical standards.
Observe less misconduct on the
◾
job.
Are more satisfi ed with their
◾
organization overall.
Feel more valued as employees.
◾
AP Photo/Stephen Senne
Name an organization to
which you belong—a club,
your family, or a religious
institution—that upholds
strong ethical principles. What
are those principles? How do
you feel when you participate
in this organization?
Warm Up
For more information on the
Tylenol crisis, go to www.
cengage.com/school/bcomm/
techwtg. Click the link for
Chapter 15; then click
Web Links.
368 | Chapter 15
Figure 15.1 Johnson & Johnson’s Credo of Values
Reprinted with permission of Johnson & Johnson
Ethics in the Workplace | 369
Digital Vision/Getty Images
Culture of Ethics
Responsible leadership sets the stage for a creating a culture of ethics in the
workplace. To create an ethical climate at work, one that fosters responsible
behavior from employees and their leaders, the Ethics Resource Center
encourages companies to hire ethics offi cers and set up ethical oversight
committees. In addition, companies should commit publicly to ethical
behavior. Leaders should evaluate and reward employees’ ethical conduct,
keep communication lines open, and—and most importantly—“walk the
talk.” A good place to begin is with a published code of ethics, a written
pledge to make responsible, moral decisions.
A corporate code of ethics states a company’s commitment to ethical
behavior. Generally, organizational codes express similar core values that
are important to the company’s operation—integrity, fairness, and respect
for others. Most corporate codes also include rules that are specifi c to their
discipline (for example, checking and double-checking sources in news
reporting and maintaining confi dentiality in counseling).
A corporate code aims to protect the public rather than the members of
the organization. Ideally, the code is enforceable and includes penalties—
reprimands, probation, termination, legal action, or extended leave without
pay. For instance, a doctor who harms patients not only can be prosecuted,
but also can lose his or her license to practice.
Writing a Code of Ethics
In companies for which no code of ethics exists, you may be asked to help
write one. Or you may start your own business, one that could benefi t from
a written code. Writing a code of ethics requires you to think about your
personal values and to refl ect on the values you want your employees to
exhibit.
370 | Chapter 15
Personal Code
The process begins with your personal code of ethics, a statement of your
values and standards. You can begin by taking a hard look at your own sense
of values and ethical conduct.
Consider writing a personal creed or personal philosophy, as one nurse did
in Figure 15.2. A presenter at a workshop asked participants to pretend they
were fl ies on the wall at their own wake or funeral, listening to the stories
people told about them after they had passed away.1 What were they hoping
to hear? After refl ecting on this question, the nurse wrote down ideas that
eventually made their way into this code. His code hangs on his offi ce wall
so he can refer to it when he has a diffi cult decision to make.
You might begin a similar process of writing a creed that expresses your core
values and conveys what is important to you. Find a quiet place where you
can think without interruption and consider these questions:
What are your core values?
◾
List values that are important to you, such as
compassion, courage, and honor. Narrow your list to between three and
fi ve items that really speak to you.
What are you passionate about?
◾
Think about your career goals or your
hobbies. What do they tell you about your life’s purpose or direction?
For example, if you like taking care of animals, perhaps you see yourself
working as a zoologist or a veterinarian.
What lessons have you learned?
◾
What lessons have you learned from
the situations you have encountered? If you have recovered from a serious
illness or accident, you may now appreciate the importance of family
or of fi nding beauty in each day.
Personal Philosophy
I am here to help others. So important is this belief to me that I became a
nurse—to help others heal so they can live healthy, productive, and happy
lives. While I will use my skills and knowledge to promote good health prac-
tices, I accept that death comes to all. When the time comes, I will respect my
patients’ last wishes and let go, honored to be witness to this sacred passage.
“To be rather than to seem” sums up my approach to life. I will stay true to
myself and not obsess over what others think.
I will adapt to changing circumstances, but will not sacrifi ce my integrity.
I value truth, even when it is unpleasant.
I consciously and willfully choose to see the good in people and circum-
stances. “People, not things” is my motto. The pursuit of things will never
come at the expense of people.
I will remember the wisdom of my grandmother whose 97 years were a tes-
tament to common sense, resourcefulness, simple values, and fundamental
decency.
Figure 15.2 Personal Code of Ethics
To raise your awareness of
your personal code of ethics,
complete the Code of Ethics
Inventory worksheet available
at www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 15.
1See Stephen Covey’s The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People for similar exercises and other
aids to writing personal mission statements.
Ethics in the Workplace | 371
Now that you have some ideas for your personal code, organize those
ideas and express them in complete sentences. Choose a title; then put
the draft aside. Come back a few days later to revise and fi nalize your
draft. When you are fi nished, you may want to frame it and keep it close
at hand. From time to time, you can revise it as circumstances infl uence
your values.
Corporate Code
A corporate code is likely to be a collaborative effort involving several team
members. The following suggestions may help you come up with ideas for
your code:
What are the company’s values?
◾
Start with a discussion of personal
values. If your team members have written personal codes, share them.
Look for similarities in your values. Brainstorm values that are important
to your organization. Look for overlapping personal and corporate values
to see which ones are most critical.
What kinds of ethical confl icts are typical of your organization?
◾
You want statements that deal with the underlying ethics behind those
confl icts. Do the confl icts revolve around personnel problems, pay issues,
discrimination, customer fairness, plagiarism, or malpractice? What
ethics underlie those issues—fairness, equality, honesty? In other words,
when an ethical dilemma arises, what values drive the resolution of the
confl icts?
How does the company want to treat others—its employees as well as
◾
its customers or clients? Consider asking for feedback from members of
your organization—members other than the writing team. Perhaps you
can conduct a focus group, a small meeting in which members respond to
prompts and someone in the meeting writes down the comments. Now might
be a good time to review the codes of other companies in your fi eld to see
how they are organized.
After putting your ideas together, rank your information in order of
importance to your organization, employees, and clients. Ask one
person in the group to write a draft of a code based on the input thus
far. The group can read the draft and make suggestions. After putting
the code aside for a while, come back to it for fi nal revising and editing.
Ask for approval from the governing body of the organization before
you publish the code.
When the company’s philosophy is written down where employees can
easily see it, it becomes more real. In times of crisis, the words can inspire
and guide employees’ decision-making processes.
Some corporate codes are long and include sections such as a Preamble,
Responsibilities, and Consequences. Some are short, such as the Ethical
Principles for Technical Communicators on page 363 and the Firefi ghter
Code of Ethics in Figure 15.3 on the next page. Notice how the Firefi ghter
Code addresses the specifi c concerns of the fi refi ghter: “to safeguard . . .
life and property against the elements of fi re and disaster . . . and
maintain profi ciency in the art and science of fi re engineering.”
372 | Chapter 15
Code of Ethics
As a fi refi ghter and member of the International Association of Fire Fighters,
my fundamental duty is to serve humanity; to safeguard and preserve life and
property against the elements of fi re and disaster; and maintain a profi ciency
in the art and science of fi re engineering.
I will uphold the standards of my profession, continually search for new and
improved methods and disseminate and share my knowledge and skills with
my contemporaries and descendants.
I will never allow personal feelings, nor danger to self to deter me from my
responsibilities as a fi refi ghter.
I will at all times, respect the property and rights of all men, the laws of my
community and my country, and the chosen way of life of my fellow citizens.
I recognize the badge of my offi ce as a symbol of public faith, and I accept it
as a public trust to be held so long as I am true to the ethics of the fi re ser-
vice. I will constantly strive to achieve these objectives and ideals, dedicating
myself before God to my chosen profession—saving of life, fi re prevention
and fi re suppression.
As a member of the International Association of Fire Fighters, I accept this
self-imposed and self-enforced obligation as my responsibility.
Figure 15.3 Firefighter Code of Ethics
Reprinted with permission of IAFF
WHAT DO YOU DO WHEN FACED WITH
AN ETHICAL DILEMMA?
The best approach is to prevent an ethical confl ict in the fi rst place by
acting above board, talking about decisions with people you trust, following
your personal values, and knowing and following the values held by your
company. Sometimes the fi rst indication that you are facing an ethical
dilemma is a feeling of discomfort. Self-refl ection may help clarify your
feelings. More analysis may be required when you are not sure what to do.
Clarify Your Position
You may need to clarify your position before you decide whether you have
an ethical dilemma and what, if anything, you should do about it. On the
following page, read about the dilemma Pilar faced at work.
STOP AND THINK
What are some ways to create a culture of ethics? Tell the story of Johnson &
Johnson and the Tylenol scare. How might you get started on a personal code
of ethics? How might you get started on a corporate code of ethics?
Think of the most diﬃ cult
ethical decision you ever
made. What standards
did you use to make your
decision? Are you happy with
the choice you made? Would
you do something diﬀ erent
today? Explain.
Warm Up
Ethics in the Workplace | 373
Would my actions be legal? If you
are not sure, ask a lawyer or read
your company’s code of ethics. If
the answer is no, you risk engag-
ing in unethical behavior.
Postponing the latest investment figures is
clearly not legal, but Pilar wonders who would
be responsible—she or her manager? Pilar is
not sure how to handle the request, but she
knows that breaking the law is not an option.
Have I thought through the
possible consequences of my
actions? If not, you need to think
about where this action will lead
and what will happen if you do
nothing.
Pilar knows that failing to report the totals on
time could cause her to lose her job if someone
discovers what she did. There also is the problem
of using the company as a reference for future
jobs. And what would she say when asked why
she left the company? To complicate things even
more, there is a chance that she could be pros-
ecuted. If she does nothing, her manager could
still report the figures inaccurately. Pilar does not
like the direction her thoughts are taking.
How uncomfortable am I? Will
you be able to sleep tonight? How
would you feel if the situation was
published in the newspaper? If you
cannot sleep and would be embar-
rassed if others knew, your action
may be the wrong one.
Yes, Pilar is waking up in the middle of the
night with her manager’s request on her mind.
Pilar pictures her coworkers in the lounge
discussing her unflattering mug shot in the
local newspaper. She shudders, feeling
extremely uncomfortable.
What central conflict am I facing?
Continue to think about your
dilemma until it is clear to you
which values are in conflict.
Pilar’s central conflict is whether to be loyal to
her manager or to do what she knows is right.
Is there an obvious solution?
Sometimes human beings over-
complicate matters when there
may be a simple and direct way
to handle things.
After a few days of worrying, Pilar decides to
tell her manager that she is not comfortable
altering the dates on the report. Pilar points
out the risk to both of them of not complying
with the law. When Pilar finishes the conversa-
tion, she sees that her manager feels conflicted
too. Together they figure out the best way to
present the data and point out that next quar-
ter’s figures—after fall sales are in—are likely
to be better. Pilar’s solution actually improves
her relationship with her manager.
Pilar’s manager has asked her not to report the latest investment totals until
next month, after the auditors have left. But Pilar knows that the company
is legally bound to report them by the 25th of each month. She could
wait, as her supervisor requested, but reporting the fi gures late would not
be legal. She feels confl icted. After all, her supervisor hired her and even
covered for her when her child was in the hospital last month. Pilar values
loyalty, yet she also values honesty and a work ethic of doing what she is
supposed to do when she is supposed to do it. She has been at this job only
a short time and is not sure what to do.
Pilar used the following questions to help clarify her position regarding the
dilemma and to reach a solution.
374 | Chapter 15
Analyze Your Ethical Dilemma
Some situations may require more analysis—especially if a course of action
does not present itself early in your thought process. Read Wilma Kwon’s
ethical dilemma and follow her line of thinking as she analyzes the dilemma
and comes up with alternatives.
Wilma Kwon is chair of the selection committee for the position of vice
president of production for Valli Shirt Factory. One applicant, 57-year-old
David Zeltzer, has 23 years of experience, looks impressive on paper, has good
references, and does well in the interview. When Wilma recommends him
for the job, the president hesitates, wanting to hire a younger man instead—
someone just out of college with no work experience. Wilma protests, but the
president is firm. Wilma is angry. Her committee screened 32 applicants and
conducted four interviews in good faith that the president would accept its
recommendation. She found a good candidate. The president’s decision looks
like age discrimination to her. Wilma is worried about the legal ramifications if
David decides to sue.
Take time to think about
what is happening. You have
heard it before: Count to 10.
Do not react impulsively.
Wilma decides to take the weekend to think things
over and to calm down.
Examine the facts. Ask ques-
tions. Play detective. Rumor,
innuendo, and excessive
drama are not the same
as facts. What really has
happened?
On Monday, Wilma reviews the selection commit-
tee’s minutes and determines that her committee
followed all company policies and broke no laws. She
examines the company’s records on hiring and finds
a troubling trend toward hiring younger candidates
over well-qualified older ones. She recalls her con-
versation with the president and takes some notes.
Clarify your short-term and
long-term goals. Sometimes
it is important to meet a short-
term goal. However, after
weighing the consequences
of a short-term goal against a
long-term goal, you may find
that pursuing a long-term goal
is a wiser, more stable option.
Wilma’s short-term goal is to hire someone as
quickly as possible. The company is going through
some tough economic times and needs a person
with experience and talent. Her long-term goal is
to find someone who will bring innovation to the
company so it is still thriving in 15 years.
Talk to someone you can
trust. Maybe you can talk to
an employee who has been
with the firm a long time. Or
you could talk to a friend,
relative, minister, or
counselor.
Wilma shares her concerns with a committee
member who has been with the company since it
began. He reminds Wilma that the founder of the
company was an older gentleman and encourages
her to keep looking for a solution. Wilma also con-
sults the human resources director, who says to
gather more evidence and see if she can convince
the president to hire David.
Review your company’s code
of ethics. Sometimes a re-
view of your company’s code
of ethics will provide the an-
swer you seek.
Wilma reviews the company’s creed and finds
the statement: “Valli Shirt Factory is an equal op-
portunity employer committed to diversity.” She is
reminded of the importance of diversity—for
herself as a woman, as well as for others.
Ethics in the Workplace | 375
Choose a Responsible Course of Action
Over the centuries, philosophers and religious leaders have given advice on
how to select a responsible course of action. The following criteria are often
touted as a way to judge the “right” thing to do:
Rights:
◾
Will my actions infringe on the rights (personal freedoms) and
dignity (self-respect) of others? If I drink and drive, I am taking away
someone else’s right to drive on a safe roadway. If I neglect to wash my
nursing home patient’s hair, I am depriving her of her dignity.
Justice:
◾
Are my actions just or fair? Are the good or bad consequences to
be uniformly divided among all members of the group? Deciding that all
of my employees except my friend Cecelia must work on a holiday does
not provide justice for all. Equality is when the same opportunities and
consequences apply to everyone.
Utility:
◾
Will my actions affect most people in the best way possible? In
other words, utility is based on what action will do the most good and the
least harm. If I vote for a tax increase for the middle class and do not vote
to tax the upper class proportionately, I may be voting to tax the group
that is least able to bear the burden fi nancially. This practice fails to affect
most people in the best way possible.
Talk to legal counsel. It never
hurts to find out just where
you and the company stand
legally.
Wilma talks to the company’s lawyer, who says it is
difficult to prove discrimination. But if the two can-
didates’ qualifications are that different—and with
a prior record of hiring younger employees over
older ones—the company could have a problem
proving that it did not discriminate.
Listen to your conscience.
Review your personal code
of ethics to tune in with your
values. What does your inner
voice tell you to do?
Wilma recalls the statement in her own code about
having the courage to stand up for what is right.
Wilma believes that David is the best candidate
for the job, and she is not comfortable with any
form of discrimination. She now feels compelled to
speak out on his behalf.
Explore alternatives. Brain-
storm alternatives. List the
advantages and disadvan-
tages of each.
Hiring the younger candidate would be the easiest
thing to do now, but what happens to the company
if he cannot perform the job successfully? In ad-
dition, if David decides to sue, a lawsuit would be
stressful, time-consuming, and expensive. Trying
to convince the president to hire David also would
take time and might strain Wilma’s relationship
with him. On the other hand, if Wilma can con-
vince him to hire David, the company could hire a
good employee and avoid a lawsuit.
Choose an alternative. After
weighing the pros and cons,
it is time to act on the alter-
native that is both ethical and
logical.
Wilma makes an appointment with the president
to present her findings. She asks the human re-
sources director to join them. If the president still
insists on hiring the younger candidate, at least he
will be aware of the consequences.
376 | Chapter 15
Care:
◾
Do my actions show that I care about and am considerate of others?
If I have an opportunity to show care and compassion for the machinist on
my staff whose house just burned down and I do not act, I have failed not
only my employee, but also my community.
Empathy:
◾
Do I have empathy for other people? Have I asked myself what
it would feel like to be in another person’s shoes? Before I decide whether
to let an employee go because of poor sales or lay the person off, I could
ask myself how I would like to be treated. I could give the person as much
notice as possible, provide some kind of severance pay, or offer to rehire
him or her when business improves.
Consistency:
◾
Is my decision consistent with my other policies? If my
policy is to allow makeup tests for students who have legitimate reasons
to miss a test and I do not allow Nora to make up a presentation she
missed, I am not being consistent.
Values and principles:
◾
Is my action consistent with the values and
principles I follow? If I value honesty but I do not let the grocer know
that he undercharged me $15 for the steaks I ordered, I am not
honoring my values of honesty and integrity.
Universal consequences:
◾
To envision universal
consequences, think about what would happen if everyone
did the same action. If everyone threw their soda cans onto
the highway, what would happen?
Extenuating circumstances:
◾
Do extenuating circumstances
need to be taken into account? My instructor does not accept
late papers, but if I am in an accident on my way to class,
perhaps she would change her rule based on my unusual
circumstances.
With any ethical dilemma, after you have chosen an alternative,
evaluate what you did. Do you need to change something? Would
you do things differently the next time? Your reevaluation may
cause you to adjust your behavior the next time you have a
similar moral dilemma.
Nereza, a research assistant, taps lightly on her supervisor’s door before
walking into his office—as she has done many times before. Richard is sitting
with a male employee. They are looking out the window and laughing. Richard
calls Nereza over and makes a joke about Claire, an overweight coworker who
is getting out of a car. Nereza says, “I like Claire. She does a good job. Besides,
we all have our physical challenges” (as she looks at Richard’s receding
hairline). Nereza shoots Richard a “you should know better” look and leaves.
Think Critically
What do you think about Nereza’s reaction?
Communication
Dilemma
The Ethics Resource Center conducts
independent research and publishes
articles for institutions interested in
maintaining high standards of ethics.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 15
and browse the Center’s resources. Read
one resource carefully and ﬁ nd three
important pieces of information to share
with your classmates.
www.cengage.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Ethics in the Workplace | 377
When Do You Blow the Whistle?
In 1994, Dr. Jeffrey Wigland, the former vice president of tobacco giant
Brown & Williamson, appeared before Congress and the Food and Drug
Administration. He testifi ed that the corporation had strong evidence of the
addictive nature of nicotine and had used additives to deliver the nicotine
more readily. Dr. Wigland was fi red in 1993 after questioning the use of one
additive in particular. As a result, he suffered fi nancial loss, death threats,
divorce, and litigation. When asked if he wishes he had not blown the
whistle, Dr. Wigland says, “I do think it’s worth it. In the end, people see
the truth.”
A whistle-blower is a person who publicly alleges an organization’s wrongful
practices. Dr. Wigland is a good example, but there are many others—Enron’s
Sherron Watkins and Firestone’s Thomas A. Robertson. As you can see from
Dr. Wigland’s example, whistle-blowing takes courage and conviction. And
although some companies welcome reports of misdeeds so they can correct
them, many want only to continue business as usual.
Laws have been enacted to protect whistle-blowers from retribution from
their employers, but fi ghting for that protection can be a long, messy, and
stressful process. Dr. Wigland was subjected to a smear campaign. Karen
Silkwood, a chemical technician who was investigating safety violations at
the power plant for which she worked, died under suspicious circumstances.
Whistle-blowing can be risky. However, consider the example of Firestone.
The lives saved as a result of learning that Firestone tires were defective
AP Photo/Ron Edmonds
378 | Chapter 15
benefi ts anyone who travels the roadways. How do you decide whether to
blow the whistle? For most people, whistle-blowing is a matter of strong
conscience, something to be used as a last resort.
If you are thinking about blowing the whistle on an organization, carefully
consider the consequences. Try to fi nd a way to work out your differences by
talking to someone. If negotiation is not an option, most authorities suggest
that you thoroughly document the infractions and keep your notes in a safe
place. Maintain good relationships with as many people in the company
as you can and talk over the situation with someone you trust. Most
importantly, seek the advice of an attorney who specializes in whistle-
blowing in your fi eld.
STOP AND THINK
What questions can help you clarify an ethical dilemma? What criteria help you
analyze a dilemma? How do you choose a responsible course of action?
WHY IS IT SO DIFFICULT TO BEHAVE
ETHICALLY?
In the South during the 1940s, Sallie Mae Knight, a social worker, was
a heroine to her clients. A white woman, she stood up for African-
American children—all by her 5'2" self—and faced down a white
male bureaucracy.
Standing up for the welfare of children, as Ms. Knight did, is the right thing
to do. But people do not always do the right thing. If asked, many people
could think of a time when they caved under peer pressure. Good people
often allow their values to be compromised. Why? Ethics are more easily
compromised under certain conditions, and people use defense mechanisms
to avoid facing uncomfortable feelings of guilt.
Conditions
According to M. S. Baucus and J. P.
Near, illegal activities are more
likely to occur in larger companies
than in smaller companies and
when resources abound rather
than when they are lacking. Illegal
activities also take place during
times of change and growth—
before a company has a chance to
examine its ethics—and in certain
industries in which wrongdoing
seems to create a climate of
complicity. For instance, politics
Why do some people have a
diﬃ cult time doing the right
thing? What are the obstacles
to making good ethical
choices?
Warm Up
Digital Vision/Getty Images
Ethics in the Workplace | 379
gets a bad rap because people think it does not matter how a politician
behaves as long as he or she gets elected.
Another problem is the legal system. While several hundred laws respond
to ethical concerns, most laws actually lag behind current debates on ethics.
In other words, legal is not the same as ethical. It might not be illegal to talk
about your boss behind his back, but it is unethical. At one time, it was legal
but not ethical to own slaves. When enlightened and passionate people stand
up for just causes, laws catch up to the ethics.
Defense Mechanisms
Finally, because people like to see themselves in the best light possible,
they often refuse to see their bad behavior for what it is. Perhaps you will
recognize the common defense mechanisms listed next.
Bandwagon approach:
◾
When one company sees other companies
behaving unethically, the company can easily justify the practice:
Everyone is doing it. If they can do it, so can we.
Denial:
◾
People deny that anything is wrong. The situation is not that
bad, they say, or they look the other way because it is easier to do that
than to deal with the problem. Denial usually makes matters worse, not
better.
Rationalization:
◾
People invent excuses for their behavior. A person may
think, I have to look out for myself, or this is what I have to do right now.
I’ll do better—later. Rationalization is generally a way to avoid looking at
the real issues.
False sense of security:
◾
Who is going to know? People reason that no
one will fi nd out, but if someone does, their supervisor will be able to
cover for them. Experience shows that the errors of a person’s ways are
eventually discovered. Besides, that person knows what he or she has
done and must live with the consequences.
Stress:
◾
Stress clouds people’s judgment. The pressure to make a sale, bring
in money, or meet a deadline can push people to the edge. It may be best
to deal with the stress and the moral dilemma separately, as they are two
different issues.
Revenge:
◾
People want payback. Someone may justify that because the
government tax code is unfair, he or she will fi ght back by not claiming
income from a part-time job. However, two wrongs do not make a right.
Blame:
◾
People believe that because they did not create a situation, they
do not have to correct it. A wise person understands that it is best to deal
with the situation at hand—regardless of who caused it.
Doing the right thing requires self-knowledge and courage. When individuals
improve their ethical behavior, society reaps the rewards.
STOP AND THINK
Why do people behave unethically?
380 | Chapter 15
Checklist
Do I know the benefi ts of ethical choices and the consequences of
◾
unethical choices?
Can I provide suggestions for creating a culture of ethics?
◾
Have I made a list of my core values?
◾
Have I determined my life’s purpose?
◾
Have I determined how I want to treat others?
◾
Do I use questions to help clarify my ethical position and come up with an
◾
alternative?
Do I use questions to help analyze an ethical dilemma and select an
◾
alternative?
Do I use criteria to help choose a responsible course of action?
◾
Am I aware of the defense mechanisms that I and others use to make poor
◾
ethical choices?
Chapter 15
Review
SUMMARY
1. Ethics are the principles and values that help people resolve questions
of right and wrong. Responsible ethical decisions provide peace of
mind and allow people to live together amicably. Irresponsible choices
bring negative consequences such as convictions, sullied reputations,
and guilt.
2. Creating a culture of ethics in the workplace supports responsible
decision making. Leaders must actively promote values. Personal and
corporate codes provide guidelines for proper behavior.
3. Working through an ethical dilemma requires careful thought to
clarify and analyze the dilemma before selecting a responsible course
of action. Whistle-blowing may be an option as a last resort.
4. Conditions in the workplace and defense mechanisms can contribute
to unethical behavior.
Ethics in the Workplace | 381
Build Your Foundation
1. Rank the values below from 1 through 15 in order of their importance
to you, with 1 being most important and 15 being least important. Then
work with a few classmates to compare your rankings. Add the numbers
for each value to see which values are important to the group. Discuss
why people ranked the values as they did.
honesty
recognition
peace
freedom
justice
altruism
nature
family
equality
self-sufficiency
friendship
health
compassion
community
success
2. What value is implied by each of the following well-known sayings?
For instance, the proverb “Give a man a fi sh and you feed him for a
day; teach a man to fi sh and he’ll eat forever” advocates the value of
education.
Different strokes for different folks.
Stop and smell the roses.
A penny saved is a penny earned.
Haste makes waste.
Where there’s a will, there’s a way.
Look before you leap.
What goes around comes around.
Pretty is as pretty does.
3. Discuss the values implied by these sayings from other cultures.2
Even a sheet of paper has two sides.
Shrouds are made without pockets.
(Japanese)
(Yiddish)
Bury the hatchet beneath the root of
Unjustly got wealth is snow sprin-
the tree. (Native American)
kled with hot water. (Chinese)
One does evil enough when one does
One head cannot hold all wisdom.
nothing good. (German)
(Maasai)
4. Bring in examples of current ethical dilemmas from news sources such
as newspapers, television, or the Internet. Discuss the examples in
terms of the criteria under “Choose a Responsible Course of Action”
beginning on page 375.
5. Reruns of older television shows and movies present moral dilemmas
that earlier generations faced. Share with the class an episode or a
movie that presents a moral dilemma and explain different sides of the
controversy. Or explain two sides of an ethical dilemma you have faced.
6. Read through the tobacco timeline at http://www.tobacco.org/
resources/history/tobacco_history.html. Discuss possible ethics
violations in the tobacco industry.
7. Which of the defense mechanisms on page 379 have you or someone
you know used? Share one example with your classmates.
2See http://wiseoldsayings.com for these and other aphorisms.
382 | Chapter 15
Your Turn
8. Write a personal creed. Find a quiet place and take notes about your
values and their importance to you. Think about ethical decisions you
have made. What do those decisions say about you? Write your code as
an essay, a poem, a letter, or a list.
9. Write an ethics statement for the career you plan to enter. Then look up
a code of ethics from a company in your fi eld. The Center for the Study
of Ethics in the Professions (http://ethics.iit.edu) publishes codes from
different fi elds. How does your code compare to the company’s?
10. In a small group or as a class project, write a code of ethics for your class.
Consider such things as values that promote proper classroom behavior
and optimal learning. Post your code on the classroom bulletin board.
11. What value(s) or belief(s) motivate the people in the following
scenarios? Are the people acting ethically? Explain.
a. An amputee who served in Iraq said that despite his disability, he wants
to return to Iraq to serve his country.
b. An employee takes $25 from the petty cash fund to pay for a movie.
The employee returns the money the next day.
c. Norm shares an idea for an advertising slogan with another employee,
who then passes it along to the supervisor as her own. Norm never reveals
that the idea was his originally and lets his coworker take the credit.
d. Olga, a middle-aged mother of three, supervises a young crew of help
desk personnel, fi ve men and two women. When the men’s jokes
become a little racy, Olga simply but fi rmly reminds them, “Gentlemen,
this is not a bar and ladies are present. Keep the language G-rated.”
The conversation then tends to become more respectful.
12. Analyze the following ethical dilemmas using relevant questions and
criteria from in the chapter. What advice do you have for Jayden and
Susan? Discuss possible solutions and test them using the criteria
beginning on page 375 under “Choose a Responsible Course of Action.”
a. Jayden is a chemist at a pharmaceutical plant. Part of quality control
is to check samples of each drug for purity and potency. Jayden
notices that the person in charge of pulling the samples, Becca, does
not test every drug, turning her attention to other tasks instead. When
Jayden asks Becca about it, she replies, “What’s your problem? I’ve
got too much to do to keep up with all of them. We’ve never found a
bad sample anyway.” To complicate the matter, Jayden used to date
Becca, having recently broken up with her. “Maybe Becca’s right,” he
thinks. “We’re all pretty careful.” What should Jayden do?
b. It is December 10, and Susan Petrov has a big decision to make. She
is the chief executive offi cer of Chesterson Refrigeration, a small
company with U.S. and overseas locations that makes refrigerators
and freezers. Because sales have dropped, the plant, which employs
786 workers, must lay off 240 employees if it is to remain open. Some
employees are near retirement, a large number have worked for the
company for ten years or more, some are college students, and some
are legal immigrants. Susan is hoping that sales will pick up next
summer. Limited funds are available to use as severance pay, and a
Ethics in the Workplace | 383
few scholarships are available for retraining. How should Susan handle
the situation? What is the most ethical way to decide who gets laid
off? When should the layoffs begin? Is there anything Susan can do to
make the situation better? When and how should she announce the
layoffs?
13. Look for possible defense mechanisms at work in the following
dilemmas. What are the central confl icts in each case? What might
happen if Gil and Cisco do nothing? Suggest possible solutions. Test
those solutions using the criteria beginning on page 375 under “Choose
a Responsible Course of Action.”
a. Gil is a freshman at North Central State. He has been helping Tazim, a
classmate who has been struggling in their calculus class. Tazim wants
to sit next to Gil during the fi nal exam so Tazim can check his answers
against Gil’s. Gil is not concerned, thinking that he is not the one who
is cheating; he is just taking the exam. What are the consequences if
Gil lets Tazim check a few answers? What should Gil do?
b. Cisco and Val are medical assistants at Tremont Hospital. Cisco has
noticed that Val is often late to work. She also calls in sick more than
she used to. She has a new boyfriend who has a reputation for drinking
and drugging. Cisco notices that Val has lost weight, and she is not
her usual bubbly self. One day Cisco sees her nervously eyeing the
medicine cart. He decides then that her problems are not his concern.
Maybe she is just working too hard. What might be going on? What
should Cisco do?
Community Connection
14. Visit a local business, charity, hospital, or wellness center. Ask someone
in a position of authority to describe the ethical climate there. Write a
short informative report on what you found. If the organization has a
written creed or mission statement, ask if you can have a copy.
15. Ask fi ve senior citizens to rank their values using the list in item 1 of “Build
Your Foundation” on page 381. Ask them to explain their rankings. Then
ask fi ve people under the age of 20 to rank and explain their values. What
differences do you see in the values the two generations provided? Prepare
a short written report to present to your class.
Works Cited
Baker, Mallen. “Companies in Crisis—What To Do When It All Goes Wrong.” Mallenbaker.net
Corporate Social Responsibility, n.d. Web. 5 May 2009.
Baucus, Melissa S. and Janet P. Near. “Can Illegal Corporate Behavior Be Predicated? An Event
History Analysis.” Academy of Management Journal 34.1, (1991): 9–36. Print.
ERC. 2000 National Business Ethics Survey. Ethics Resource Center. 2000. Web. 6 June 2009.
—. “Ten Things You Can Do to Avoid Being the Next Enron.” Ethics Resource Center. 29 May
2009. Web. 13 Dec. 2009.
Harned, Patricia J. “Letter.” 2007 National Business Ethics Survey. 2007. Web. 5 May 2009.
Wigland, Jeffrey. Interview. 60 Minutes. CBS. New York. 4 Feb. 1996. Television.
384 | Chapter 16
Technical Reading
WRITE TO LEARN
How does a science or computer textbook differ from a literature textbook?
Do you read scientifi c or technical material differently from the way you read
literature? If so, how? Do you like to read? Why or why not? How often do
you read scientifi c or technical information? How do you remember what
you read? Write a journal entry addressing these questions.
Chapter
Focus on Technical Reading
Read the sample of technical reading on the next page and answer these
questions:
What features of technical writing do you recognize in the passage?
•
What has the reader done to interact with and understand this passage?
•
What kind of information has the reader noted?
•
What If?
The passage included more technical vocabulary?
•
The information in the passage was part of a presentation on satellites?
•
The passage included a couple of graphics?
•
Goals
Explain the difference between technical
◾
reading and literary reading
Preview and anticipate material before
◾
you read
Use strategies for reading technical
◾
passages
Terms
acronyms, p. 395
◾
annotating, p. 391
◾
anticipate, p. 387
◾
background knowledge,
◾
p. 387
formal outline, p. 392
◾
graphic organizers, p. 393
◾
informal outline, p. 392
◾
literary reading, p. 387
◾
pace, p. 391
◾
previewing, p. 387
◾
technical reading, p. 387
◾
technical vocabulary, p. 394
◾
Technical Reading | 385
Sample of Technical Reading
From Essentials of Oceanography by Garrison, 2009. Reprinted with permission of Brooks/Cole,
Cengage Learning.
Satellites Have Become Important Tools in Ocean Exploraon
The Naonal Aeronaucs and Space Administraon (NASA), organized in 1958, has become an
important instuonal contributor to marine science. For 4 months in 1978, NASA's Seasat, the ﬁrst
oceanographic satellite, beamed oceanographic data to Earth. More recent contribuons have been
made by satellites beaming radar signals oﬀ the sea surface to determine wave height, variaons in sea-
surface contour and temperature, and other informaon that in terests marine sciensts.
The ﬁrst of a new generaon of oceanographic satellites was launched in 1992 as a joint eﬀort between
NASA and the Centre Naonal d’Études Spaales (the French space agency).The centerpiece of
TOPEX/Poseidon, as the project is known, is a satellite orbing 1,336 kilometers (835 miles) above Earth
in an orbit that allows coverage of 95% of the ice-free ocean every 10 days. The satellite's TOPography
Experiment uses a posioning device that allows researchers to determine its posion to within 1
cenmeter (1/2 inch) of Earth's center! The radars aboard the satellite can then determine the height of
the sea surface with unprecedented accuracy. Other experiments in this 5-year program include sensing
water vapor over the ocean, determining the precise locaon of ocean currents, and determining wind
speed and direcon.
Jason-1, NASA's ambious follow-on to TOPEX/Poseidon, launched in December 2001. Now ﬂying 1
minute and 370 kilometers (230 miles) ahead of TOPEX/Poseidon on an idencal ground track, Jason-1's
primary task is to monitor global climate interacons between the sea and the atmosphere. Its 5-year
mission has been extended.
SEASTAR, launched by NASA in 1997, carries a color scanner called SeaWiFS (sea-viewing wide-ﬁeld-of-
view sensor). This device measures the chlorophyll distribuon at the ocean surface, a measure of
marine producvity.
NASA launched AQUA, one of four of NASA's next generaon of Earth-observing satellites, into polar
orbit on 4 May 2002. It is the centerpiece of a project named for the large amount of informaon
that will be collected about Earth's water cycle, including evaporaon from the oceans; water vapor in the
atmosphere; phytoplankton and dissolved organic maer in the oceans; and air, land, and water
temperatures. AQUA ﬂies in formation with sister satellites TERRA, AURA (Figure 2.28), PARASOL, and
CloudSat to monitor Earth and air.
A satellite system you can use every day? The US. Department of Defense has built the GPS (Global
Posioning System), a "constellaon" of 24 satellites (21 acve and 3 spare) in orbit 17,000 kilometers
(10,600) above Earth. The satellites are spaced so that at least 4 of them are above the horizon from any
point on Earth. Each satellite contains a computer, an atomic clock, and a radio transmier. On the
ground, every GPS receiver contains a computer that calculates its own geographical posion using
informaon from at least 3 of the satellites. The longitude and latude it reports are accurate to less
than 1meter (39.37 inches) depending on the type of equipment used. Handheld GPS receivers can be
purchased for less than US$70. The use of the GPS in marine navigaon and posioning has
revoluonized data collecon at sea.
How?
Satellites
IMPT in
marine
research
History of
research
measures
how?
Other uses?
SEASTAR
JASON
TOPEX
AQUA
GPS
386 | Chapter 16
Writing@Work
Stephen Freas is a construction
subcontractor in Winston Salem,
North Carolina. He is a supervisor on
job sites and manages small crews to
build projects based on drawings provided by the general
contractor. He writes contracts, e-mails with clients, and
often consults manuals and building codes.
The contracts Stephen writes are more than just fine print
to be skimmed and signed. “A contract lets the client know
exactly what we’re going to do—what materials and processes
will be necessary, what those will cost, and what the potential risks are,” says
Stephen. “A detailed contract also prevents us from doing costly work for free.”
Stephen’s job requires him to do a great deal of technical reading. “Reading
construction plans and technical manuals requires a physical engagement with
the writing,” he says. “In these texts, an action usually follows each sentence
or image. This makes for slow but ‘action-packed’ reading that helps you
accomplish something you had no idea how to do previously.”
Stephen often combines information gleaned from several different pieces
of technical writing in order to make proper decisions. For example: “Once,
we built a handicap ramp to the specifications written by the contractor.
Upon inspection, the city told us that the ramp did not meet its building
code standards. I refused to rebuild the ramp until I read the city code
myself. The code listed specifics such as ramp thickness; railing height; and,
most important, ramp slope. I calculated that in order to meet city code
specifications, the ramp needed to be three times longer than the contractor’s
original plan and, coincidentally, the same slope as the existing sidewalk.”
Stephen credits his technical reading dexterity to countless hours of following
instruction manuals for his car, photography, climbing, and other hobbies.
Think Critically
1. Why does Stephen consider construction plans and technical manuals to be
“action-packed”?
2. Think about the completed handicap ramp from the point of view of
Stephen, the general contractor, and the building inspector. What solution
would work for everyone?
Printed with permission of Stephen Freas
Courtesy of Stephen Freas
Technical Reading | 387
What kinds of technical
documents will you read
in your chosen trade or
profession?
Warm Up
Why do people read
literature? Why do people
read technical documents?
Warm Up
TECHNICAL READING VS. LITERARY READING
Technical reading is distinguished by technical subject matter, an emphasis
on precision, specialized vocabulary, use of graphics, and descriptions of
mechanisms and processes. Reading a technical text is different from reading
literature. Literary reading requires the reader to draw inferences—to read
between the lines and interpret symbolic language. Technical documents,
though, require you to grasp the logic of text packed with detailed and
precise information. Those who digest technical information quickly can
stay on top of the latest developments in their fi eld. To aid in understanding,
profi cient readers familiarize themselves with the text before they read and
interact with the text as they read.
BEFORE YOU READ
Fortunately, there are things you can do before you read to aid your
comprehension of the passage.
Preview the Material
Previewing warms up the mind for reading, just as stretching warms up
the body for exercise. After previewing, you read with greater effi ciency and
retention because you know what to expect.
When previewing, skim the introduction to determine the subject. Turn
headings into questions, anticipate and foresee the information to follow,
and notice where information is placed. In a manual, for example, thumb
through the pages to see where the schematics and descriptions of parts are
located. Use the preview to activate your background knowledge, what you
already know about the subject, to gain more meaning from the passage.
The example on the next page shows how one student previewed the sample
passage on page 385 by anticipating the subject and turning the headings
into questions.
bo1982/iStockphoto.com
388 | Chapter 16
Subject:
The title “Satellites Have Become Important Tools in Ocean
Exploration” and the fi rst sentence suggest that the passage
will discuss how satellites are used to study the ocean.
Questions:
How are satellites used to study the oceans?
What kind of data do satellites provide?
How useful is this data?
Anticipate the Line of Reasoning
Knowing the typical reasoning of technical passages will help you anticipate
and mentally prepare for the reasoning. Most technical passages focus on:
A process or procedure (steps; how something works).
◾
A cause/effect relationship (what makes something happen).
◾
A mechanism (what something looks like and what it is supposed to do).
◾
Figure 16.1 shows a process description of air fl ow in coastal regions. This
process description, however, also includes several cause/effect relationships.
One action causes another action. As a result, this chain reaction also is
responsible for the process.
Land breezes and sea breezes are small, daily mini-monsoons. Morning sunlight falls
on land and adjacent sea, warming both. The temperature of the water doesn’t rise as
much as the temperature of the land, however. The warmer inland rocks transfer heat
to the air, which expands and rises, creating a zone of low atmospheric pressure over
the land. Cooler air from over the sea then moves toward land; this is the sea breeze
(Figure 7.15a). The situation reverses after sunset with land losing heat to space and
falling rapidly in temperature. After a while, the air over the still-warm ocean will be
warmer than the air over the cooling land. This air will then rise, and the breeze direc-
tion will reverse, becoming a land breeze (Figure 7.15b). Land breezes and sea breezes
are common and welcome occurrences in coastal areas.
(a) In the afternoon, the land is warmer than the ocean surface, and
warm air rising from the land is replaced by an onshore sea breeze.
Warm air
ascends
Onshore flow
Cool air
descends
Warmer land
Cooler sea
(b) At night, as the land cools, the air over the ocean is now warmer
than the air over the land. The ocean air rises. Air flows offshore
to replace it, generating an offshore flow (a land breeze).
Cool air
descends
Cooler land
Offshore flow
Warmer sea
Warm air
ascends
Figure 16.1 Process Description
Source: Tom Garrison, Essentials of Oceanography, 5th ed., 2009, 157. Reprinted by permission of Brooks/Cole
Cengage Learning.
Figure 7.15 The flow of air in coastal regions during stable weather conditions
Technical Reading | 389
Figure 16.2 shows another process: instructions for scanning an image. The
reasoning here is linear—a chronologically organized sequence of events.
Discriminating readers use their critical-thinking skills to look out for information
that is inaccurate, biased, sensationalized, or lacking in pertinent details.
When you use data from your reading, you have an ethical obligation to
double-check that data, looking for other sources that report the same findings.
Publications that must be produced quickly—such as newspapers, magazines,
and books on the latest technology—are subject to errors. Information
published with few, if any, editorial guidelines—for example, some articles on
the Internet and stories in tabloids—are subject to unscrupulous uses.
The next time you find an Internet article that promises the fountain of youth
or hands you a get-rich-quick scheme, be skeptical and remember that you
cannot believe everything you read.
Think Critically
What might motivate people to publish articles that are not completely factual?
Communication
Dilemma
Figure 16.2 Step-by-Step Process
From An Introduction to Web Design + Programming by Wang and Katila, 2004
It is recommended that when scanning printed images, you do the following:
1. Scan the image at twice the resolution as you normally would to capture more
information.
2. Use the despeckle fi lter (Filter > Noise > Despeckle) in Photoshop to minimize the
dotted texture.
3. Use the Gaussian blur fi lter (Filter > Blur > Gaussian Blur). Adjust 0.1–0.9 to
“soften” or blur the image and minimize the Moiré pattern.
Figure 16.3 shows cause-to-effect reasoning as the text explains how humans
contribute to the extinction of species. Notice the use of words such as cause,
because, and as a result to pinpoint the causes and effects.
Figure 16.3 Cause-to-Effect Relationships
From Ecology and Behavior by Starr et al., 2009
Humans cause habitat loss, degradation of habitat, and habitat fragmentation, all of
which can endanger a species. Humans also directly reduce populations and endanger
species by overharvesting. Species introductions also cause declines of native species. In
most cases, a species becomes endangered because of multiple factors. Sometimes, a de-
cline in one species as a result of human activity leads to decline of another species.
390 | Chapter 16
Figure 16.4 shows a mechanism description that describes the function of
each part of a light switch.
STOP AND THINK
How do you preview a reading passage? What kind of reasoning processes are
typical of technical passages?
Figure 16.4 Mechanism Description
Source: Fletcher, Gregory. Residential Construction Academy: House Wiring, 2nd ed. 2008, Delmar/Cengage
Learning, 52. Used with permission of Delmar/Cengage Learning.
Figure 2-38 shows the parts of a basic single-pole switch. The main parts in-
clude the following:
Switch toggle: Used to place the switch in the ON or OFF position when
•
moved up or down.
Screw terminals: Used to attach the lighting circuit wiring to the switch.
•
On a single-pole switch, the two terminal screws are the same color, usu-
ally bronze.
Grounding screw terminal: Used to attach the circuit-grounding conductor
•
to the switch. It is green in color.
Mounting ears: Used to secure the switch in a device box with two 6-32
•
size screws.
OFF
6-32 Mounting
Screw
Screw
Terminals
Mounting
Ears
6-32 Mounting
Screw
Mounting
Strap
Toggle
Grounding
Terminal
Figure 2-38 The parts of a single-pole switch.
Technical Reading | 391
AS YOU READ
Because technical reading is different from other kinds of reading, you must
approach technical reading with a plan. Good readers pace themselves and
interact with the text by annotating the passage, repeating information aloud,
understanding the vocabulary, paying attention to numbers, and studying
graphics.
Pace Yourself
Runners pace themselves, proceeding slowly and regularly, to expend their
energy evenly throughout a race. You, too, should pace yourself when you
read by following these suggestions:
Read slowly. Technical reading is packed with details. Make sure you take
◾
them all in.
Read small amounts of information for short periods of time (perhaps
◾
10 to 15 minutes). Then take a break, summarizing information and
taking notes.
Read the selection twice. During the second reading, you can see what
◾
you missed the fi rst time. Also, a second reading allows you to see the
transitions that denote how the parts of the passage fi t together.
Activate Your Background Knowledge
The more you read in a technical subject, the better reader you will become
in that area. For example, if you regularly read auto mechanics magazines,
you will comprehend a new article about a hybrid car better
than someone who regularly reads computer magazines.
Knowledge of the subject and familiarity with vocabulary used
in the area gives you background knowledge on which to build a
new understanding. You activate this knowledge when a concept
or an example reminds you of something you already know.
As you read, allow your mind to form associations with
knowledge you have already stored. When Adrienne read a
discussion of synthetic elements in the periodic table, she already
knew that synthetic means “man-made.” Therefore, she could
identify synthetic elements as having been made in a lab.
Annotate the Reading Passage
Writing about what you read is important for retaining
information. As you write, you activate more areas of the brain
and, therefore, understand and retain more information. In this
way, annotating jump-starts your learning.
Annotating a passage means taking your own notes and
interacting with the text. When annotating a passage, use
abbreviations, note what is signifi cant, outline the passage, use
graphic organizers, and/or answer questions.
What strategies do you
currently use for reading and
studying?
Warm Up
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
Electronic readers such as Amazon’s Kindle™
and Sony’s Reader Digital Book are changing
the way people read. Users can download
books, magazines, and newspapers into an
eReader in a matter of seconds. The hand-held
devices are thin and ﬁ t easily into a pocket or
purse. The eReader allows users to annotate
reading passages on the screen. Prices range
from between $200 and $700. The next
generation of eReaders will use Electroﬂ uidic
Display Technology (EFD) to create the visual
brilliance of the printed page.
Thinking Critically
What are the advantages and disadvantages
of using an eReader?
392 | Chapter 16
Use Abbreviations
To help you write about what you read, devise or borrow a system of
abbreviations for marking information. Here are a few examples:
IMPT or !
important information
EX or ex
example
. .
math symbol for therefore
b/c
because
?
questions; don’t understand
items in a sequence
Note What Is Significant
Take notes on a technical passage by summarizing sections and writing
the main ideas in your own words. Also note any specialized vocabulary,
answers to questions you posed during the preview, descriptions of
processes, and cause-and-effect reasoning. Mark segments you do not
understand so you can reread, ask questions, and seek clarifi cation.
If you own the book or article, you can mark important information with
annotations, your handwritten notes, in the margins. If you prefer to take
notes in a notebook, write the same information there. The opening sample
on page 385 shows a technical passage with a student’s annotations. Notice
how the student uses symbols and abbreviations.
Consider an Outline
Figure 16.5 shows a formal outline, which is set with Roman numerals,
numbers, and a system of letters, for the oceanography passage. Figure 16.6
shows an informal outline, a less structured system, for the same material.
Both outlines help the reader see major divisions in the passage and serve as
effective summaries.
Figure 16.5 Formal Outline
Satellites Have Become Important Tools
in Ocean Exploration
I. Major NASA satellites in ocean exploration
A. TOPEX/Poseidon 1992
1. Accuracy to within 1 cm of Earth’s center
2. Data on sea height, water vapor, ocean currents, winds
B. Jason-1 2001
C. SEASTAR 1997
D. AQUA 2002
1. Flies with sister satellites
2. Measures Earth’s water cycle
.
To practice annotating a
text, complete the activity
Technical Reading: Passage 1
worksheet available at
www.cengage.com/school/
bcomm/techwtg. Click the
link for Chapter 16; then click
Data Files.
Technical Reading | 393
Consider Graphic Organizers
Some students draw graphic organizers to map the relationships among
ideas by using circles, blocks, and lines. A circle or block represents the
central idea. Lines between circles or blocks show how other parts of the
topic relate to the central idea. Figure 16.7 illustrates two organizers.
Figure 16.6 Informal Outline
Satellites Have Become Important Tools
in Ocean Exploration
NASA Satellites
TOPEX/Poseidon 1992
– Satellite positioning within 1 cm of Earth’s center
– Data—height of sear surface, water vapor, oceans currents, winds
Jason-1 2001
SEASTAR 1997
– Data—chlorophyll and marine productivity
AQUA-2002
– 1 of 4 satellites
– DATA—Earth’s water cycle
Figure 16.7 Graphic Organizers
Satellites Have Become Important Tools in Ocean Exploration
NASA
GPS
Sea height
Vapor
Currents
Winds
TOPEX/Poseidon
Jason-1
SEASTAR
AQUA
Accurate
positions
3 sister
satellites
Water
cycle
Satellites in
Oceanography
Jason-1
SEASTAR
AQUA
Water
cycle
3 sister
satellites
TOPEX
Poseidon
Accurate
positioning
satellites
Changed
marine nav
Revolutionized
marine navig.
US Dpt of Defense
Data
Winds
GPS
Currents
Vapor
Sea
height
394 | Chapter 16
Answer Questions
Answering questions also can be a helpful note-taking tool. The questions can
be your own or your instructor’s, or they can be from end-of-chapter exercises.
Figure 16.8 shows written answers to questions. One student answers the
questions posed during the preview and then moves to the end-of-chapter
questions.
Figure 16.8 Answers to Questions
Answers to questions in preview:
1. Satellites beam radar signals off the surface of the ocean. SEASTAR
uses a color scanner (SeaWiFS) to measure the distribution of
chlorophyll.
2. Satellites provide information about ocean currents, water vapor,
marine productivity, wind direction and speed, and sea height. GPS
satellites provide information about location and position.
Answer to an end-of-chapter question:
How does the GPS work? Satellites (21 active; 3 spare) orbit 10,600 miles
above Earth. At least 4 are above the horizon at any time from any place
on Earth—each with a computer, an atomic clock, and a radio transmitter.
Each GPS receiver on Earth has a computer to calculate its position
(accurate to within 1 meter) from 3 satellites in longitude and latitude.
Repeat More Difficult Notes Aloud
Hearing what you have written and read in silence may help you retain
diffi cult information. Try repeating the following notes aloud:
Freud divided the personality into the id, the pleasure principle; the ego,
the reality principle; and the superego, the morality principle. Freud divided
the personality into the id, the pleasure
principle; the ego, the reality principle; and
the superego, the morality principle. Freud
divided the personality into . . .
After reading this passage, a student
probably could name the three parts of the
personality and describe each one.
Understand the Vocabulary
Sometimes you can fi gure out technical
vocabulary, specialized terms, from the
context—from a description or an example.
Other times the term is defi ned in the text—
after a linking verb, in parentheses, or in an
appositive.
jhorrocks/iStockphoto.com
Technical Reading | 395
Figure 16.9 shows examples of several terms defi ned in a text. Note that
some words, such as alley and husband, do not mean the same thing for
the production specialist or conservationist as they do for you. Even terms
that are familiar may be used in different ways for the technical reader. Also
notice the use of acronyms (letters that stand for a long or complicated term
or series of terms).
Figure 16.9 Vocabulary Defined in a Text
When you cannot determine the vocabulary from the context, use a
dictionary or a glossary provided in the document to look up the term.
Another option is to ask an expert to defi ne a word for you.
Some defi nitions need more than a phrase or a sentence and extend to a
paragraph or more. Figure 16.10 illustrates an extended defi nition of the term
desert. The examples and description help the reader gain a more complete
understanding of the term.
A parasite lives in or on another living organism called its host, feeding on
the host without killing or benefi ting the host.
A market is a group of buyers and sellers interested in transacting business
over a particular good or service. A competitive market is a market with suffi -
cient buyers and sellers so that the market price is not signifi cantly impacted.
The alley, or space between two columns of text, is too wide.
Environmentally conscious citizens are careful to husband our natural re-
sources and protect those resources for future generations.
Childhood vaccines include the MMR (measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine and
IPV (inactivated polio vaccine).
Figure 16.10 Extended Definition
From Ecology and Behavior by Starr et al., 2009
Deserts are regions that receive an average of less than 10 centimeters
(4 inches) of rain per year. Most are located at about 30° north and south
latitude, where air depleted of moisture sinks. In these regions, the low
humidity allows much sunlight to reach the soil surface, so the ground heats
fast during the day. Low humidity also causes the ground to cool fast at
night. Soils are typically nutrient poor and somewhat salty. Despite these
forbidding conditions, some plants and animals survive, especially in areas
where moisture is available in more than one season.
The driest of all deserts may be Chile’s cool Atacama Desert, which lies in a
rain shadow behind the Andes.
396 | Chapter 16
Learn to Read Graphics
Be prepared to think visually when you begin to read a technical passage.
Draw a picture of what you are reading—on paper or in your mind. To read
graphics included in the text, make sure you understand the purpose of
each type of graphic. Then closely study the graphic as well as the author’s
explanation of it. How does the graphic support the author’s message? What
does the author want you to notice about the graphic?
Understand the Purpose of the Graphic
Become familiar with the purpose of each type of graphic. When
you see a diagram, for example, know that the purpose is to help
you see what an object looks like. You can then read the graphic
with that purpose in mind. Recall the following graphics and their
purpose:
Tables organize numerical and verbal data in rows and columns.
◾
Pie graphs show how the whole is divided into parts.
◾
Bar graphs contrast sets of data.
◾
Line graphs show trends over time or relationships among data.
◾
Flowcharts present various processes, including decision-making
◾
processes, or the hierarchy of an organization.
Gantt charts present a timeline for a project.
◾
Diagrams and photos show what something looks like.
◾
Read the Graphic Closely
After you have fi nished noting what kind of graphic you are reading and
what its purpose is, read the graphic closely, noticing everything
about it.
Read the title to determine the subject matter of the
◾
graphic.
Look for keys or legends to see what each part presents.
◾
Read the callouts to identify parts.
◾
Read the
◾
x-axis and the y-axis to see the relationship among
the sets of data.
Next, relate the information in the graphic to the author’s
discussion of the graphic. What does the author want you
to notice about the graphic? If you are asked to remember a
diagram, you may want to draw the diagram yourself.
A number of the technical reading passages in this chapter
illustrate the importance of graphics. Figure 16.1 uses a
picture and arrows to represent the creation of land and sea
breezes. Figure 16.4 includes a diagram of a light switch to
make the description easy to follow. Each graphic presents
technical information effi ciently and clarifi es the explanation
provided in words.
The Internet is a seemingly never-ending
supply of technical information. Many
sites let you download entire technical
articles and books. Onlinenewspapers.
com provides links to many newspapers,
journals, and specialty publications from
all over the world.
Go to the NET Bookmark for Chapter 16.
Locate a newspaper from another state
or country. Then ﬁ nd an article that
you ﬁ nd interesting and read it. Share
highlights of the article with your class.
www.cengagelearning.com/school/bcomm/techwtg
Technical Reading | 397
Pay Attention to Numerical Data
Resist the temptation to read too quickly through discussions that contain
numbers. Note that the number $1,231.49, while only six digits long, actually
stands for nine words—one thousand two hundred thirty-one dollars and
forty-nine cents. Even though digits save space on the page, you need to
take time to process the digits mentally as words.
You are a chemist at a pharmaceutical company who has been given the task
of determining the effects of a controversial medicine on humans. You have
not been given much time and money to complete your research, however.
Because you do not have time to spare and because your company wants
to be able to claim that the medicine is safe, you find only two articles from
the same journal and use information from them in your report. You would
like to check other articles in case the information you found has been
discredited, but the findings could prevent your company from marketing
the medicine. You submit the report, which states that the medicine is
safe for humans. Over the next couple of months, your study is discredited
because of the negative side effects that many consumers experienced when
they took the medicine.
Think Critically
What would be the effects of this discovery—for you and for your company?
Focus on
Ethics
STOP AND THINK
What are the technical reading strategies?
398 | Chapter 16
Chapter 16
Review
SUMMARY
1. Technical reading is different from literary reading in its subject
matter and its emphasis on precision, specialized vocabulary, use of
graphics, and descriptions of mechanisms and processes.
2. Before you read technical documents, preview the material and
anticipate the line of reasoning.
3. As you read technical documents, pace yourself, activate your
background knowledge, annotate the passage, repeat diffi cult notes
aloud, make sure you understand the vocabulary, read the graphics,
and pay attention to numerical data.
Checklist
Have I previewed the material I am preparing to read?
◾
Have I anticipated the line of reasoning? Is the reasoning a process or
◾
procedure, a cause-and-effect relationship, or a mechanism?
Have I paced myself?
◾
Have I activated my background knowledge?
◾
Have I annotated the reading passage with notes, an outline, a graphic
◾
organizer, and/or answers to questions?
Have I considered repeating diffi cult notes aloud?
◾
Do I understand the vocabulary?
◾
Have I read the graphics?
◾
Have I paid close attention to numerical data?
◾
Technical Reading | 399
Build Your Foundation
1. How did you read technical passages before you read this chapter? Will
you change anything about how you read technical passages now? Explain.
2. Compile a list of three terms in a technical fi eld with which you are
familiar. Ask your classmates if they understand the vocabulary.
3. Conduct a poll of 20 people to fi nd out which kind of reading each
person prefers—technical or literary. What kind of technical articles do
they read? Which kind of reading do you prefer? What kind of technical
articles do you read?
4. Analyze your textbooks or technical magazines. Isolate one chapter or
one article. How much of the vocabulary is new to you? How much
technical vocabulary is in the passage? How many graphic aids are
there? Do some of the passages use numbers? If so, how? Which parts
would be clearer if you repeated them aloud? How would you organize
this information if you had to learn it for a test?
5. Locate the technical word and the part of the sentence that defi nes that
word in these sentences from A+ Guide to Hardware by Jean Andrews.
a. “A short circuit, or a short, occurs when uncontrolled electricity
fl ows from the hot line to the neutral line or from the hot line to
ground . . .” (103).
b. “A rectifi er is a device that converts alternating current to direct
current” (102).
c. Voltage regulators “provide a degree of protection against swells or
spikes (temporary voltage surges) and raise the voltage when it drops
during brownouts or sags (temporary voltage reductions)” (109).
d. “Registers are small holding areas on the processor chip that work
much as RAM does outside the processor” (131).
e. “Called fl ash ROM, the software stored on these chips can be
overwritten by new software that remains on the chip until it is
overwritten” (27).
f. “A ground bracelet, also called an antistatic strap or ESD bracelet, is a
strap you wear around your wrist” (51).
g. “Fiber-optic cables transmit signals as pulses of light over glass strands
inside protected tubing . . .” (450).
h. VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol), also called Internet telephony, was
once a novelty on the Internet . . .” (461).
Your Turn
6. Read the excerpt on the next page from Principles of Economics. Pick out
the technical reading elements.
a. Do you see a description of a process? If so, where?
b. Do you see cause-and-effect reasoning? If so, where?
c. Do you see specialized vocabulary of the discipline? If so, which
terms? Are the terms defi ned in the text so that you understand what
they mean?
d. Look at the graphic closely. Interpret the graphic and explain how you
read it.
400 | Chapter 16
DEMAND
To an economist, the term demand—whether the demand for tickets or the demand
for roses—has a very specifi c meaning. Demand is a relationship between two
economic variables: (1) the price of a particular good and (2) the quantity of that good
that consumers are willing to buy at that price during a specifi c time period, all other
things being equal. For short, we call the fi rst variable the price and the second
variable the quantity demanded. The phrase all other things being equal, or ceteris
paribus, is appended to the defi nition of demand because the quantity that consum-
ers are willing to buy depends on many other things besides the price of the good; we
want to hold these other things constant, or equal, while we examine the relationship
between price and quantity demanded.
Demand can be represented by a numerical table or by a graph. In either case, demand
describes how much of a good consumers will purchase at each price. Consider the
demand for bicycles in a particular country, as presented in Table 1. Of course,
there are many kind of bicycles—mountain bikes, racing bikes, children’s bikes, and
inexpensive one-speed bikes with cruiser brakes—so you need to simplify and think
about this table as describing demand for an average, or typical, bike.
PRICE
QUANTITY
DEMANDED
PRICE
QUANTITY
DEMANDED
$140
$240
$160
$260
$180
$280
$200
$300
$200
Source: Taylor and Weerapana, Principles of Economics, 2010, 53–54. Used with permission of Cengage Learning.
Table 1 Demand Schedule for Bicycles (millions of bicycles per year)
Demand Schedule for Bicycles (millions of bicycles per year)
Observe that as the price rises, the quantity demanded by consumers goes down. If the
price goes up from $180 to $200 per bicycle, for example, the quantity demanded goes
down from 11 million to 9 million bicycles. On the other hand, if the price goes down,
the quantity demanded goes up. If the price falls from $180 to $160, for example, the
quantity demanded rises from 11 million to 14 million bicycles.
. . . The law of demand says that the higher the price, the lower the quantity demanded
in the market; and the lower the price, the higher the quantity demanded in the market.
Technical Reading | 401
7. Take notes from the passage below using suggestions from the chapter.
a. Preview the passage, making annotations. Either photocopy the
passage and write on it or take notes on a separate sheet of paper.
b. Outline the passage (formally or informally) or draw a graphic
organizer.
c. Answer the questions posed during your preview and read them aloud.
Invention, Innovation, and Diffusion. Technological change occurs when
new ideas are developed into new products that increase production, such
as the steel plow, the harvester, the combine, the automobile, radar, the tele-
phone, the computer, the airplane, lasers, and fi ber-optic cable. Economists
distinguish between an invention, which is the discovery of new knowl-
edge or a new principle, such as electricity, and innovation, in which the
new knowledge is brought into application with a new product, such as the
electric lightbulb. Economists also distinguish between the innovation itself
and the diffusion of the innovation throughout the economy, a process that
involves advertising, marketing, and spreading the innovation to new uses,
such as the use of the electric lightbulb to create night shifts in factories.
The sewing machine is a good illustration of invention, innovation, and
diffusion. By 1847, inventors had built 17 different machines capable of
mechanically forming a stitch. But only one of these, Elias Howe’s sewing
machine, developed into a commercially successful innovation. As Howe tried
to sell his invention to consumers, he found out how to modify it to make it
more useful and attractive. Soon the invention turned into a popular innova-
tion that was used widely. Wide diffusion of the innovation occurred as others
produced household versions of the sewing machine, like the one marketed
by the Singer company. This story also illustrates that innovation and diffu-
sion require the work of an entrepreneur who recognizes the potential of the
invention.
Technology depends in part on scientifi c knowledge, and many people feel that
science will become more and more important in driving the future technological
change. But technology is much more than scientifi c knowledge. The discovery
of DNA did not improve technology until it was applied to genetic engineering.
The knowledge of mathematics made the invention and development of
computers possible, a technology that has obviously improved productivity.
Source: Taylor and Weerapana, Principles of Economics, 2010, 606–607. Used with permission of
Cengage Learning.
Community Connection
8. Interview two people who work in technical fi elds. Find out how much
they read on the job and what strategies help them understand and
remember the information they read. Write your interview in question-
and-answer format.
9. Find an article to read to a shut-in, a visually impaired person, or a group of
school children. Annotate your text and become familiar with the vocabulary
beforehand. Write a short trip report to summarize your experience.
402 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
THE INSIDE TRACK
Tech Writing Tips
Manufactured Home Dealer
I or we attitude:
Do we, at Mountain View Homes, have deals! Our 14 x 70 single-wides have been
marked down 20%. And our 14 x 80s can be purchased with a rebate of $1,000!
You attitude:
You can find a real deal at Mountain View Homes. You can purchase our 14 x 70 single-
wides at 20% off the regular price. And you can receive a rebate of $1,000 on a brand
new 14 x 80.
To use the you attitude, simply consider the situation from your reader’s
viewpoint. What is the advantage to him or her? Then, where appropriate,
add more you’s and your’s to your message and take out some of the I’s,
we’s, or company names. Point out the benefi t of your message to your
reader.
YOU ATTITUDE
With the exception of the science lab report, most technical writing should
be reader-centered rather than writer-centered. A reader-centered approach,
or you attitude, attempts to look at situations from the reader’s perspective
instead of the writer’s perspective. The you attitude points out advantages to
the reader and makes him or her more likely to accept what the writer says.
Use the you attitude to persuade your audience to think or act in a certain
way. For example, you might send an e-mail to your supervisor asking for
time off, a letter to a newspaper editor opposing a proposed city curfew, or a
letter to a dry cleaner asking for a reduction in your bill because your clothes
were not clean when you picked them up.
Notice the difference between the I or we attitude and the you attitude in the
following example. The you attitude sounds friendlier and more positive. The
you attitude stresses how a customer can benefi t from buying a home from
Mountain View Homes. Using the you approach is psychologically smart as a
motivator, and it makes a good sales pitch.
You Attitude | 403
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. Rewrite these sentences to refl ect a stronger you attitude. Remember, you
cannot eliminate uses of I, we, and company names, but you can slant
the writing to be more reader-centered. Add any information that will
help the reader see the advantages.
a. We will ship the rest of your order next week.
b. Powell Insurance Company is reliable. We have been in business at
the same location for more than 50 years.
c. I want you to take the conversational Spanish classes for several reasons.
d. Your overdue account must be paid within 30 days. Otherwise, we will
give you a poor credit rating and stop taking your orders.
e. We do not have your order in stock. We will notify you when we do.
f. I expect you to be in the offi ce by 8 A.M. for several reasons.
g. I do not think you should choose clothes that are diffi cult and time-
consuming to take care of.
h. We want all students to stay on school grounds during lunch so they
will not be late for class.
i. We have marked down all furniture for our moving sale. We would
rather sell the furniture than move it. Everything must go!
j. You are required to take 30 semester hours of general college courses.
2. Rewrite the following announcements to refl ect a stronger you attitude.
a. Our Volunteer Club has many items for sale. Members are selling
tapes, CDs, and club T-shirts that have never been worn. One member
is bringing boxes of science fi ction novels. We are selling game
cartridges and earrings. The earrings are handcrafted by one of our
members. We have a set of golf clubs, a black-and-white TV, and a
chest of drawers. These items and many more can be seen at 2323
East Third Street on Saturday morning at 6 A.M. We hope to raise
enough money to help victims of the recent fl ood in our area.
b. Mama’s Kitchen, a hip new home-cooking restaurant, is proud to
announce its grand opening at 2349 Michelin Circle on Saturday,
January 31, 20—. Renowned chef and owner Daria O’Doole, says
that her restaurant will offer the best blue plate specials in town, and
she wants everyone to come in and try her meatloaf, which is made
from a recipe handed down to her and originating with her great-
grandmother. Ms. O’Doole wants to keep her blue plate specials under
$10 because she says her mother taught her to be frugal.
404 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
Here you see that the short, terse style creates a negative tone. The words
Arrive promptly and If you are not seated by 8 A.M. may spark anger in
some employees who perceive that they are being treated like children. The
following version is improved.
A positive tone makes people more likely to cooperate. You can create a
positive tone by using the following suggestions:
Avoid Negative Words.
◾
A number of words carry such negative messages
that you should try to avoid them. Words such as never, failed, cannot,
and regret often can be replaced with more positive words.
Use Tact.
◾
Choose your words carefully. Be sensitive to their impact.
Instead of saying that you do not like a particular sweater, try saying that
the sweater shows personality.
Chemical Processing Division Members:
Do not be late for the hazmat training on Tuesday, September 8. The session is sched-
uled for 8 to 11 A.M. The trainer has another appointment after our training. Arrive
promptly at 8 A.M. or earlier. If you are not seated by 8 A.M. in Room TR2045, you will
find the session closed to you. Then you will be required to earn your certification at a
later session.
Chemical Processing Division Members:
We are pleased you have registered for hazmat training on Tuesday, September 8,
8–11 A.M.
Please plan to arrive in Room TR2045 no later than 8 A.M. Our instructor must conduct
the session on schedule so he can begin his afternoon training on time.
Thank you for your cooperation. If you have any questions, please contact . . .
TONE
Tone refers to the emotional overtones that words emit. Words not only provide
information, but also convey emotions. Because human beings are both rational
and emotional creatures, tone can affect the way readers react to words.
Unlike the objective tone in technical reports, letters give writers an
opportunity to show a range of emotions—from apathy to warmth, from
enthusiasm to anger. While some unanswered complaint letters may
appropriately display anger, most letters you write should convey a positive,
upbeat, and reader-centered tone.
Read the following passage. Describe the tone. Which words contribute to
that tone?
Tone | 405
Accentuate the Positive.
◾
Be optimistic. Most people prefer to do what
is right and best for all concerned. Remember that you can think of the
cup being half full (accentuating the positive) instead of half empty
(accentuating the negative).
Remember Your Manners.
◾
Say please and thank you.
Note the differences in the following examples. What did the writer do to
change a negative tone in the fi rst column to a more positive tone in the
second column?
Do not sign the evaluations.
Please keep the evaluations anonymous.
If you fail to sign the form, your return
will be late.
Please sign the form to avoid unneces-
sary delays.
We insist that you include a deposit.
Please enclose a deposit.
We received your fax in which you claim
that we sent you damaged goods.
Your faxed letter of July 5 indicates that
you received damaged goods.
If you decide to visit our museum . . .
When you visit our museum . . .
Your essay is disorganized.
Concentrate on organizing your ideas.
The Inside Track: Your Turn
Make the following statements more user-friendly by rephrasing them to
sound more positive.
1. Your outfi t is too loud for the commercial. Mr. Carlson will not like it. It
will clash with the background.
2. We told you to be at work by 8 A.M. sharp!
3. You claim to have had a fl at tire on the way to the Springfi eld
warehouse.
4. We cannot allow you to make inappropriate comments.
5. You have had more than enough time to pay the small amount shown on
the enclosed bill.
6. If you cannot attend the rehearsals on time, you cannot speak with the
product development team.
7. Our sweatshirts will not shrink.
8. You will not encounter any problems with our software.
9. Do not walk on the grass. Stay on the sidewalks!
10. If you do not contact us before November 17, we will not have time to
process your request.
11. You are working too fast to be accurate. You are making careless errors.
12. Our stores are never closed.
13. If you decide to contribute to the children’s fund, your money will never
be spent unwisely.
406 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
PARALLELISM
In writing, two sets of words are parallel because they use the same
grammatical structure. Your ability to recognize parallel structure depends
on your ear and your knowledge of grammar. Words, phrases, and clauses
joined by coordinating conjunctions and used in lists should be parallel.
Parallel Words, Phrases, and Clauses
Can you hear that these sets of words are not parallel?
1. I like running, biking, and to paint.
2. He told us to wash the developer pan and that we must sweep the fl oor.
3. I like to inventory the stock, list the overruns, and to read orders reports.
The grammatical structure of these sentences may help you see where the
break in parallel structure occurs:
S V Gerund Gerund Infinitive
1. I like running, biking, and to paint.
In Sentence 1, the infi nitive breaks the parallelism because the list started
with -ing words, gerunds.
S V Indirect object Infinitive phrase Dependent clause
2. He told us to wash the developer pan and that we must sweep the fl oor.
In Sentence 2, the dependent clause breaks the parallelism because the list
started with an infi nitive phrase.
S V to + verb/object verb + object to + verb/object
3. I like to inventory the stock, list the overruns, and to read orders reports.
In Sentence 3, to was not repeated in each part of the series; so the
parallelism was broken.
Here are improved versions of the above sentences:
1. I like running, biking, and painting.
I like to run, bike, and paint.
2. He told us to wash the developer pan and to sweep the fl oor.
He told us to wash the developer pan and sweep the fl oor.
He told us that we must wash the developer pan and sweep
the fl oor.
3. I like to inventory the stock, to list the overruns, and to read orders
reports.
I like to inventory the stock, list the overruns, and read orders reports.
Parallelism | 407
Parallel Lists
The itemized list below is not parallel. Which parts of the list are more alike
than other parts?
The above list is not parallel because one item is a noun preceded by an
adjective, two are listed as questions, one starts with an -ing word, and one
is a simple noun. To make the list parallel, begin each part of the list the
same way. Use all -ing beginnings, all questions, all nouns, or all nouns
preceded by adjectives.
The following list makes the entire group parallel with the fi rst item by
repeating the adjective(s) + noun structure.
Parallel Order
Using the same order of information also makes parts of a resume parallel.
For example, if you present the employment experience of Position 1 as
Name (of business), City/State (of business), Dates (of work), and Job Title,
you must present the experience of Position 2 in the same order. Do not put
dates fi rst, name second, address third, and so on.
The following example shows three job descriptions that use correct parallel
order.
At the next Spanish Club meeting, we will discuss these items:
Next year’s budget
◾
Which person to nominate for chair
◾
Implementing our attendance policy
◾
Whether to donate money to the senior class project
◾
Elections
◾
Next year’s budget
◾
Chair nominations
◾
Attendance policy
◾
Senior class project donations
◾
Upcoming elections
◾
Taylor Computer Manufacturing; Erie, PA; July 2009–Present; Project Manager
Hix Landscaping Service; Pittsburgh, PA; May 2008–June 2009; Assistant Landscape
Technician
BookWorld Publishing Services and Discount Books; Pittsburgh, PA; October 2005–
March 2008; Salesclerk
408 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
4. Make each of the following sentences parallel by fi lling in the blank with
an appropriate word or phrase.
a. The fi tness instructor ran a marathon,
, and won
a weight-lifting contest.
b. The following people will be receiving computer upgrades this year:
Leo Vasquez, Chief of Operations; Carla Willoughby, Quality
Assurance Director; and Lucy Alva,
.
c. Shoe repairers liked stiletto heels because the tips needed frequent
repair, doctors warned against stiletto heels because they caused
sprained or broken ankles, and
.
5. Correct these sentences for faulty parallelism.
a. The letter directed us to preview the contracts, sign them, and to
return them promptly.
b. The rules were fair but that they could not be enforced.
c. Margarita and Jerome were told to be at the offi ce at 2 P.M. and that
they had to refi ll the rental car with gasoline.
d. She had trouble explaining her position and which decision to make.
e. The new product line is noted for its durability, its attractiveness, and
it is reliable.
6. Make the following sets of job descriptions parallel in structure.
a. Baylor Industries, Huntington, WV. June 2007 to February 2010—.
Sales Representative: called on customers and kept accounts.
b. Sales Director. January 1999 to August 2009. United Sales Corporation,
Beckley, West Virginia. Duties included supervising sales personnel,
training new personnel, and calling on customers.
c. Cookeville, TN, May 2002 to September 2008 Murphy’s Art Supply,
Salesclerk, ordered art supplies, created company newsletter, arranged
displays, and wrote proposal to acquire funds to open a coffee shop
in the store.
d. Branyon Fine Arts Group, taught piano and voice lessons, Cookeville,
TN, October 2006 to present, served as music teacher.
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. Refer to the unparallel list at the top of the previous page. Make the list
parallel to the second item, “Which person to nominate for chair.” Then
make the list parallel to the third item, “Implementing our attendance
policy.” Which of those two lists do you prefer? Why?
2. Make a list of your morning routine. Set up your list with this statement:
Every morning I follow the same routine.
3. Make the activities in the following list parallel:
Chairperson of Booster Club
◾
Delivered Meals On Wheels to
◾
shut-ins
United Way: accepted pledges
◾
Recorder for Debate Team
◾
Economy | 409
ECONOMY
Good technical writing is economical. As good food is rich in nutrition and
low in fat and sugar, good technical documents are rich in meaning and low
in unneeded words and phrases. Technical writers who think of their readers
try to write clearly and concisely so that documents take less time and
trouble to read. As a writer, you also save production time and costs when
your writing is economical. The following tips will help you cut unnecessary
words and phrases:
Avoid
◾
There Is/There Are and It Sentence Openings. Revise sentences
starting with There is or There are to give the sentence a subject at the
beginning, where it will get more attention, followed by an action verb.
There is and There are sentences are not wrong, but they are weak
sentences that waste words. Getting directly to the point of the sentence
is better. Look at the following examples:
WEAK:
There are 10 units of amoxicillin stored in the warehouse.
IMPROVED:
Ten units of amoxicillin are stored in the warehouse. (passive voice)
The warehouse stores 10 units of amoxicillin. (active voice)
WEAK:
There is a direct relationship between the consumption of animal
fats and cholesterol levels.
IMPROVED:
The consumption of animal fats relates directly to cholesterol levels.
(active voice)
The technique for revising these sentences is as follows: (1) Cross out the
There is or There are opening. (2) Move the subject of the sentence to the
opening position. (3) Create an action verb, sometimes from a word that
follows the subject.
Likewise, sentences should not start with it unless the it refers to a specifi c
person, place, or thing already mentioned. When you see that it in a sentence
is incorrectly used, omit the it. Revise the sentence to give a stronger
meaning without the unneeded word. Refer to the following examples:
WEAK:
It gives me great pleasure to introduce our new quality assurance
officer, Rebecca Beckett.
IMPROVED:
I am pleased to introduce our new quality assurance officer, Rebecca
Beckett.
WEAK:
It is the thermostat that received an electrical surge.
IMPROVED:
The thermostat received an electrical surge.
Delete Unnecessary Modifi ers.
◾
In the following examples, you can see
that the modifi er placed before each word is unnecessary. These words
do not need modifi cation. For instance, can something be very essential?
No, something is either essential or not essential. Here are other common
examples of unnecessary modifi ers:
highly satisfactory
extremely competent
very rare
slightly expensive
barely visible
perfectly clear
410 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
Avoid Redundancy.
◾
Redundancy is needless repetition. Redundancy adds
words but does not add meaning. Omit unnecessary repetition. You can
probably think of other redundant expressions to add to the list below.
refer back
advance warning
cancel out
blue in color
large in size
the state of Nevada
the month of June
basic fundamentals
3 A.M. in the morning
Reduce Needless Phrases, Clichés, and Overused Expressions.
◾
Writers
sometimes pad their writing, intentionally or unintentionally, with
unnecessary phrases. Do not use an entire phrase when a single word will
do. Each phrase listed below would be better replaced by its single-word
equivalent after the equal sign.
due to the fact that = because
prior to = before
in the event that = if
at a later date = later
be aware of the fact that = know
at a rapid rate = rapidly
in this modern day and age = today
in many cases = often, frequently
Many of the overused expressions listed below may sound familiar to
you because you have read or heard them often. Although these clichés
may be easy to write because they jump from your memory, they are not
exciting to read. Each of the following clichés is followed by a possible
replacement.
every effort will be made—we will try
attached herewith is—attached
as per your request—as you asked
upon receipt of—having received
as a general rule—generally
under separate cover—separately
I will be most grateful if—Please
afford an opportunity—allow
for the reason that—because
based on the fact that—because of
Replace
◾
-ion Nouns with Stronger Action Verbs. Use of -ion nouns often
adds words without advancing meaning. These nouns can usually be
omitted, making the sentence shorter and stronger.
Notice in the improved sentences that the -ion nouns have been turned
into action verbs.
WEAK:
The Food and Drug Administration, under public pressure, took into
consideration the adoption of several new Alzheimer’s medications.
IMPROVED:
The Food and Drug Administration, under public pressure,
considered adopting several new Alzheimer’s medications.
WEAK:
Heidi came to the conclusion that the report was a summation of
court procedure.
IMPROVED:
Heidi concluded that the report summarized court procedure.
Economy | 411
Avoid Strings of Prepositional Phrases.
◾
Some prepositional phrases
may be necessary to join ideas, but too many of them can be distracting.
Whenever possible, revise sentences to remove excessive prepositional
phrases.
WEAK:
The drop in deposits by students in their accounts at the bank is of
great concern for management.
IMPROVED:
Decreasing student bank deposits concerns management.
WEAK:
The EPA office in Anchorage plans to send out warnings to residents
about possible contamination from lead in the water.
IMPROVED:
The Anchorage EPA office will warn residents about possible lead-
contaminated water.
Remove Unneeded
◾
That. In many sentences with a relative clause
beginning with that, writers can omit that without changing the meaning.
WITH THAT:
The camera operator thought that the set was too dark.
WITHOUT THAT:
The camera operator thought the set was too dark.
Read the sentence aloud without that. If the sentence makes sense and the
meaning does not change, you can omit that.
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. Revise the following sentences to omit the There is/There are and It
openings.
a. There are ten cases of welding rods on order.
b. It is certain that the cable to connect the CD-ROM to the computer is
missing.
c. There is a solution that strips the silver from the fi lm to create the
photographic contrast.
d. It is phosphate that encourages growth of algae in the river.
e. It gives me great anxiety knowing that the federal inspectors may
come any day.
2. Revise the following sentences to eliminate unnecessary modifi ers,
redundancies, and needless phrases.
a. The new packaging, which is oval in shape, has proven quite
satisfactory in tests in the northeast market.
b. The CAD software is 5% faster than it was prior to the upgrade.
c. Designers should be aware of the fact that hidden cameras record their
production process.
d. In this modern day and age, we expect almost all jobs to involve
computer use.
e. As a general rule, the attorney general ensures victims that every
effort will be made to protect their privacy.
412 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
3. Revise these sentences to replace the -ion nouns with stronger action verbs.
a. The bulletin provides a description of a closed electrical circuit.
b. The committee took our amendment into consideration.
c. The continuation of Naoko’s project depends on the fi nancial support
of UpStart.
d. The Research Division presented a recommendation that all toxic
wastes be disposed of through Standard Corporation.
e. The synthetic fi bers make an action like natural fi lament.
4. Revise the following sentences to omit clichés and unnecessary
prepositional phrases.
a. As per your request, I am sending the antenna to fi t your AS302 model.
b. The combinations of fragrance seem to sell well in areas of large
metropolitan population in the United States.
c. The toner cartridge for the LaserWriter needs to be replaced with care.
d. With precision and swiftness, the photographer loaded the fi lm into
the camera.
e. I will be most grateful if you can afford me an opportunity to
interview for the vacant position in your accounting area.
5. Revise the following paragraphs, using the skills you learned in this
section to make the writing economical and easier to comprehend.
a. There are more than 2,600 automatic external defi brillators being
recalled by Good Heart Inc. It has been learned that the United States
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has received reports of electrical
problems of the machine in the electrode pads for placement on the
chest. Although very rare, this problem could make the use of the
device dangerous.
b. Defi brillators are used by emergency responders, amateur and
professional, to treat sudden, unexpected, and unforeseen cardiac arrest.
Good Heart Inc. representatives said every effort will be made to locate
customers and replace defective units. Purchasers may refer back to their
invoices; if the model number is BC 4039–BC 5011, in many cases, these
machines are included in the recall. These units were manufactured from
January in the year of 2010 through August in the year of 2011.
c. While the recall is voluntary, the FDA is considering further
investigation and a mandatory recall at a later date. It is not known
how many people have been adversely affected by malfunctions of
automatic external defi brillators from Good Heart Inc.
Using Numbers | 413
4. Use fi gures for units of measurement. Note that the unit of measurement
may be expressed as a word, an abbreviation, or a symbol.
18 meters
5 1⁄3 cups
4.25 liters
55 mph
5.5 centimeters
66 2⁄3 feet
75 MHz
35 mm film
0.05 margin of error
14.4 K baud
32"
8" x 10"
5. Use fi gures for fractions and decimals presented with whole numbers.
5 1⁄3
66 2⁄3
72.6
10.25
6. Use fi gures to express exact amounts of money.
$181.95
8¢
$0.95
7. Use fi gures for data presented in tables and illustrations.
2. Use fi gures when a series contains numbers above and below 10.
3. Use fi gures when several numbers (including fractions) are presented in
a single sentence or in several related sentences.
USING NUMBERS
The following rules are generally accepted as guidelines to help you decide
when to write numbers as fi gures and when to write numbers as words in
technical documents.
1. Generally, use fi gures for numbers 10 and above. Use words for numbers
one through nine.
Inspecting
work
Attending
meetings
Writing
Planning
projects
12%
25%
33%
30%
Figure 1 Time Spent on Tasks
Oleander Community College presented 22 partial scholarships and 15 full scholarships
to first-year students.
Two computers and four of the operators were relocated to Operations.
The client’s estate included 498 acres of land, 173 paintings, 3 mansions, and 15
thoroughbreds.
The delivery is lacking 2 metric tons of steel I-beams, 3 ⁄4 case of stainless steel bolts,
1 ⁄8 of the paint needed, and 1 spool of electrical wire.
414 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
8. Use fi gures for addresses and dates.
Route 5 Box 182
103 East Maple Street
January 3, 1865
9. Use fi gures to express age.
3 years old
a man in his 20s
an 18-year-old woman
10. Use fi gures for identifi cation numbers.
11. Use fi gures for one of two numbers written next to each other.
two 42-cent stamps
16 two-liter bottles
12. Use fi gures to indicate time not expressed with o’clock.
8 A.M.
12:10 P.M.
13. Use fi gures for statistics and scores.
14. Use fi gures for page and volume numbers.
15. Use fi gures and words for very large numbers (over 6 digits).
$6 trillion
4 million people
5.3 billion years
16. Use words at the beginning of a sentence. Rewrite awkward sentences so
that the numbers are written as fi gures within the sentence.
17. Use words for indefi nite or approximate numbers.
The correct number is 378-18-3555.
The engine number is JEMH00347WE99678.
The odds were 3 to 1 in the district attorney’s favor.
The Cavaliers won the game, 96–89.
Turn to page 45 in volume 2 of your manual.
Nine thousand seven hundred and sixty-six citizens signed the petition.
The petition contained 9,766 signatures.
More than one hundred scientists attended the symposium.
Approximately 50 frogs were examined for the parasite.
Using Numbers | 415
18. Use words for fractions not connected to whole numbers.
19. Use words for ordinals below 10. Use fi gures and last letters for ordinals
over 10.
third base
ninth inning
10th person
21st birthday
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. In each pair of sentences [(a) and (b), (c) and (d), and so on], choose
the sentence that illustrates the best use of numbers and fi gures.
a. The credit union is offering 8.25% interest for CDs.
b. The credit union is offering eight and a quarter percent interest
for CDs.
c. AG Goldsmiths reported the theft of eighteen diamonds over two
carats each.
d. AG Goldsmiths reported the theft of 18 diamonds over two carats
each.
e. 5,031 people reside within the city limits.
f. Five thousand thirty-one people reside within the city limits.
g. The bus departs at three in the afternoon.
h. The bus departs at 3 p.m.
i. Over 1/2 of the laboratory rats were infected.
j. Over one-half of the laboratory rats were infected.
2. Using the guidelines from this section, rewrite the following passages to
use numbers and fi gures appropriately.
a. Penguin is the common name for fi fteen species of fl ightless marine
birds. They live on four continents in the Southern Hemisphere.
One penguin, the Galapagos, lives within six degrees of the equator.
Penguins can swim through the water at speeds of up to twenty-fi ve
miles per hour. The largest species, the emperor penguin, ranges
from three to four feet tall. The smallest, the Adelie, stands about
two feet tall.
b. On the twenty-third of February in the year two thousand and seven,
one hundred forty-two mallards were tagged off the coast of Florida.
For fi ve years, researchers tracked approximately seventy of the
mallards over three hundred and ninety-seven miles. The ducks
survived in temperatures as low as minus ten degrees Celsius.
A report was distributed to twenty-seven agencies in seven states.
The research cost six thousand forty fi ve dollars and fi fty-six cents.
It is estimated that seven and one half million mallards inhabit the
southeastern area of the United States. Biologists estimate that ninety
percent of the mallards follow predictable patterns of migration.
Approximately three-fourths of the nurses have been vaccinated.
416 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
CLARITY
Good technical writing is clear. To make your writing clear, follow these
suggestions:
1. Use traditional S-V-MODIFERS, S-V-OBJECT, or S-V-COMPLEMENT
word order.
Incorrect:
◾
Behind Tray 2 and beside Bin 3 is where the blockage
occurred.
Correct:
◾
The blockage occurred behind Tray 2 and beside Bin 3.
Incorrect:
◾
The production order she wrote.
Correct:
◾
She wrote the production order.
Incorrect:
◾
Hectic was the ambassador’s schedule.
Correct:
◾
The ambassador’s schedule was hectic.
2. Write moderately short sentences (12–24 words).
Incorrect:
◾
The registration procedure begins with the student making
an appointment with his or her adviser, at which time the adviser and
student will discuss the student’s career goals, placement test scores,
and transcripts to determine a schedule of classes that the adviser will
enter into the computer and that the student will pay for before the
registration period ends—that is, unless the computers are down, in
which case the student must come back another time.
Correct:
◾
The registration procedure begins with the student making
an appointment with his or her adviser. At this time, the adviser
and student will discuss career goals, placement test scores, and
transcripts to determine a schedule of classes. Next, the adviser will
enter the schedule into the computer. The student will pay for the
classes by the end of the registration period. If the computers are
down, the student must come back.
3. Place the main idea (the subject or topic) fi rst.
Incorrect:
◾
The board of directors agreed to open three new staff
positions as well as fi ll fi ve vacant slots. The board also voted last week
to invest the money awarded in the lawsuit in facility upgrades. Now
the board is considering a motion to halt dividends for the next two
years. The board of directors favors company growth over dividends.
Correct:
◾
The board of directors favors company growth over dividends.
The board also voted last week to invest the money awarded in the
lawsuit in facility upgrades. The board of directors agreed to open
three new staff positions as well as fi ll fi ve vacant slots. Now the
board is considering a motion to halt dividends for the next two years.
4. Use active voice—unless you have a good reason to use passive voice.
Incorrect:
◾
The new computers were purchased by the school board.
Correct:
◾
The school board purchased the new computers.
(Also see The Inside Track: Active Voice and Passive Voice on pages 418–420.)
Clarity | 417
5. Use parallel structure.
Incorrect:
◾
Orientation consisted of the following activities:
Meeting our adviser
•
Tour the campus
•
Placement tests
•
Correct:
◾
Orientation consisted of the following activities:
Meeting our adviser
•
Touring the campus
•
Taking placement tests
•
(Also see The Inside Track: Parallelism on pages 406–408.)
6. Use fi rst person (I or we) whenever possible.
Incorrect:
◾
The defective parts were returned to the AM Machining
Company.
Correct:
◾
We returned the defective parts to the AM Machining
Company.
7. Choose precise nouns and verbs.
Incorrect:
◾
Last night the security guard sounded an alarm.
Correct:
◾
On Wednesday, October 16, 20—, at 8:53 P.M., Juwan
Minnifi eld, the security guard on duty at the southeast entrance of
Whitley Laboratory reported smoke coming from under the Electronic
Control Room door.
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. The following sentences lack clarity. Revise these sentences to make the
meaning clearer.
a. The speed limit is somewhere between 50 and 60 mph.
b. The tickets are to be distributed sometime next week by the
committee.
c. In came my father to tell me the good news.
d. Maintain good health by exercising regularly, eating a balanced diet,
and for goodness sake, keep a positive attitude.
2. Using the suggestions from this section, rewrite the following paragraph
to make the sentences and the message clearer.
First, he hoed a small area until the dirt was broken up. Then he
raked out the clumps of grass, pulling up those stubborn weeds. The
fertilizer was applied lightly and worked into the ground with a hoe.
Next, plastic stuff was placed all over the plot of land and stuck to
the ground at intervals of 3 feet to keep the grass from growing and
to allow the rain to drain through and bring needed moisture to
the roots. Then holes were cut in the plastic stuff, not too far apart.
François planted some fl owers through the plastic stuff into the
ground. Then over the plastic stuff and around the plants pebble
rocks were placed to hold down the plastic and so the area would
look neat. François made planting a garden look easy.
418 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
ACTIVE AND PASSIVE VOICE
Which of these sentences do you prefer? Why?
Active Voice:
Mariah hit the ball during Saturday’s game.
Passive Voice:
The ball was hit during Saturday’s game by Mariah.
Most people prefer the fi rst sentence because it is direct, clear, and
interesting. As a result, it is easier to read than the second sentence.
Look at the verbs in each sentence. The active voice sentence uses only one
verb. The passive voice sentence uses two verbs: the verb to be + the past
participle of another verb. (The verb to be includes is, am, are, was, were, to
be, been, and being.) The past participle is simply the past tense form of the
verb that uses a helping verb.
Look at the subject in each sentence. In the active voice sentence, the subject
is the doer of the action. In other words, Mariah performs the action: she hits
the ball. In the passive voice sentence, the subject is being acted upon. In
other words, the ball was acted upon (was hit) by Mariah.
Use active voice when you want to emphasize an action. Because active
voice sentences are more direct, you should write in active voice unless you
have a good reason for writing in passive voice. Sometimes there are good
reasons to use passive voice, as the following rules explain.
1. If you do not know the doer of the action, passive voice gives you the
opportunity to leave out the doer.
Passive:
The money was taken.
Active:
The thief took the money.
2. Maybe you know who the doer is, but do not want to say. Sometimes
passive voice can help you be diplomatic or polite.
Passive:
Your blueprints have been delayed.
Active:
We lost the blueprints.
Passive:
The microscope was broken.
Active:
You broke the microscope.
3. Scientifi c writing calls for an objective tone, which is hampered when
the doer of the action is included in the sentence. Scientifi c writing
focuses on the process, not the person.
Passive: The fluid volume was increased 20% with the addition of sodium.
Active: The fluid volume increased 20% with the addition of sodium.
Active: The researcher increased the fluid volume 20% by adding sodium.
Active and Passive Voice | 419
4. Sometimes the receiver of the action is more important than the doer. You
can emphasize the receiver by using passive voice. Ads, in particular, like to
stress you as the receiver of services that companies can offer.
Changing Voice: Passive to Active.
◾
Look for two-word passive voice
verbs—the verb to be and the past participle. If you see that a report
contains too many passive voice sentences, convert the passive verbs
to one-word active verbs by (1) placing the doer as the subject of the
sentence, (2) adding a doer that is not included in the sentence, or
(3) turning the simple subject of the verb into a direct object.
Changing Voice: Active to Passive.
◾
If your science report calls for more
passive voice construction, decide what process, material, or mechanism
you want to emphasize and place that item in the subject position. Make
sure your verb includes to be + the past participle. Or if you would prefer
not to point an accusing fi nger at a particular person, focus the sentence
on the object that received the action.
Try changing the direct object of the verb into the simple subject of the
passive voice verb.
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. Find the passive voice verbs in the following sentences. Then change
these passive voice sentences to active voice.
a. The accident report is submitted by the manufacturing engineer.
b. The minutes for Wednesday’s meeting were lost on the computer.
c. The computerized key to my offi ce has been deactivated.
d. The Area VI Tennis Classic is being sponsored by the Alpha Deltas in May.
e. The blueberry bushes were ordered by my assistant, who is managing
the landscaping project.
Passive: Ted Kennedy was elected to the U.S. Senate for nine terms.
Active: The people of Massachusetts elected Ted Kennedy senator for nine terms.
Passive: You are kept up-to-date with Newsweek.
Active: Newsweek keeps you up to date.
Passive: The car was repaired by the mechanic.
Active: The mechanic repaired the car.
Passive: The window was replaced last month.
Active: Calvin replaced the window last month.
Active: The scientist added a cooling agent to the compound.
Passive: A cooling agent was added to the compound.
Active: Phillipa completed the company’s annual report yesterday.
Passive: The company’s annual report was completed yesterday.
420 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
f. According to our parents, my brother and I are needed to run errands
for the family business this Saturday.
g. Jerry McGinty has been placed on inactive status by the coach.
h. All plastics are required to be placed in recycling bins by order of the
City Council.
i. Thanksgiving dinner is being served at the shelter on Wednesday.
j. With six weeks of consecutive shopping orders, coupons for free gas
are offered by Lambert Food Stores.
2. Find the active voice verbs. Then change these active voice sentences to
passive voice.
a. John Hinkley shot President Reagan.
b. The chemist introduced sulfuric acid to the mixture.
c. Shelly Malone, your teacher’s aide, sent three diffi cult students to the
offi ce last week.
d. An unknown person robbed Mr. Miller’s convenient mart last
Thursday evening.
e. Onyx Computer provides you with complete support.
f. You waste fuel when you idle your car at stop signs.
g. Balducci’s invites you to shop the big sale.
h. The technician in framing spilled glue on your portrait.
i. Jensen Furniture’s quality assurance staff thoroughly tested the lounge
chair’s durability.
j. Helen fi nished the wedding cake two hours before the ceremony began.
3. Read the following memo. Consider the content and identify the
audience. Decide which verbs should be active and which should be
passive and revise accordingly.
TO:
Salvadore Alvarez, Public Relations Director
FROM:
Elenore Lucia, Crew Chief, Graphics
DATE:
October 31, 20—
SUBJECT:
Production Delay for Employee Appreciation Project
The artwork you requested for the Employee Appreciation display will not be ready for
the November 15, 20—, deadline. While the graphics professionals usually are aware of
scheduling, this time my assistant, Frank Stanwych, overlooked two other major projects.
Despite our problems, some of your requests will be completed on schedule. The
two lighted stars can be hung from the skylight. The posters covered with employees’
photographs may be printed. In addition, Erin Taft and Vince Delgado will produce
the traditional Employees of the Year Awards booklet. The booklet will be available to
visitors and staff beginning December 1.
Gender-Unbiased Language | 421
Two ways to solve this problem are to (1) reword the sentence to omit any
reference to gender and (2) include both genders.
a. Each scientist fi les the laboratory OSHA report after completing the
quarterly review.
b. All scientists fi le their laboratories’ OSHA reports after completing
their quarterly review.
c. Each scientist fi les his or her laboratory’s OSHA report after
completing the quarterly review. (Using his or her can be awkward
when it is repeated in a number of sentences.)
3. Avoid biased language by referring to men and women in the same way
when using courtesy titles in similar situations. The preferred title for
women (unless you know the woman’s preference) is Ms.
USE THIS
NOT THIS
Darnell Griggs and Erica Stokes
Darnell Griggs and Erica
Mr. Barnes and Ms. Pedroza
Peter Barnes and Ms. Pedroza
Austin and Kara Peterson
Mr. and Mrs. Austin Peterson
Caroline and Anthony Russo
Caroline Russo and her husband
GENDER-UNBIASED LANGUAGE
Technical writers should be sensitive to diversity in the workplace. One way
to begin is to use gender-unbiased language.
1. Avoid biased language by choosing words that include both genders.
USE
RATHER THAN
USE
RATHER THAN
representative
Congressman
synthetic
manmade
firefighter
fireman
polite
ladylike
police officer
policeman
doctor
woman doctor
mail carrier
mailman or
postman
nurse
male nurse
chair/presiding
officer
chairman
people/humanity/
human beings
mankind
supervisor/manager
foreman
synthetic
manmade
2. Avoid biased language by using pronoun references that include both
genders.
The following sentence implies that all scientists are men:
Each scientist files his laboratory’s OSHA report after completing his quarterly review.
422 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
4. Avoid biased language in letter salutations by including both sexes. Of
course, you should use the receiver’s name if at all possible. When you
cannot determine the receiver’s name, these options may be used:
a. Use a job title such as Dear Personnel Offi cer.
b. Omit the salutation and complimentary close (simplifi ed letter style).
c. As a last choice, use either of the following: Dear Sir or Madam or
Dear Madam or Sir (alphabetical).
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. In each pair of sentences [(a) and (b), (c) and (d), and (e) and (f)],
select the sentence that uses gender most appropriately.
a. The Human Resources Offi cer is responsible for notifying candidates
of their interview day and time.
b. The man in charge of the Human Resources Department is responsible
for notifying each candidate of his interview day and time.
c. The mailman is late, and I’m hoping for a response from Lucas
Marthey and Julianna.
d. The mail carrier is late, and I’m hoping for a response from Lucas and
Julianna Marthey.
e. A female pastor conducted the funeral service.
f. An Episcopal pastor conducted the funeral service.
2. Revise the following sentences to eliminate biased language.
a. Each of the paratroopers was trained to his maximum ability.
b. Miss Maxine Faulkner, Fausto Diaz, and Kha’n Vu are listed as having
senior security clearance.
c. The woman doctor should begin her letter to the Swiss hospital
administrator with Dear Sir because she does not know the
administrator.
d. Any businessman needs to be aware of his educational options.
e. The nurse must record her observations on the patients’ charts.
f. All mankind is responsible for making the earth a cleaner, safer place
to live.
g. Mrs. Michelle Obama, Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor, and Al
Gore appeared in the photograph.
h. The foremen will fi le their reports with the CPD director each Friday.
i. Did you ever want to be a fi reman or a policeman when you were young?
3. Revise the following paragraph to avoid gender-biased language.
To Whom It May Concern: Dr. Patrice Harbaugh has been an excellent
female dentist for more than 20 years. Each of her colleagues sends
his best wishes, and patients at Mirabelle Center will miss her. Her
team members—Dr. Castillo, Miss Alice Lazar, and Theo and Melinda
Baines—offer congratulations on her retirement.
Effective Transitions | 423
EFFECTIVE TRANSITIONS
Like any good writing, technical documents need logical connections
between ideas. These connections make writing smooth and improve readers’
comprehension. The following four techniques help a writer achieve these
logical relationships between ideas and between sentences and paragraphs:
Repeated keywords
◾
Pronouns
◾
Parallel structures
◾
Transitional terms
◾
Repeated Keywords
Repeated keywords often refer to the topic or important information in a
document. They remind readers of what is signifi cant in the discussion or
what the document is trying to achieve. For example, if you were writing
about lumber cut for housing construction, you might begin with the word
lumber and later repeat that word or use synonyms such as boards, logs,
planks, or timber.
Pronouns
While repeating keywords can improve coherence, using the same word over
and over can become boring. Therefore, writers also use pronouns to tie
ideas together. Read the partial instructions below to see how the pronouns
connect ideas and improve coherence.
The pronoun it refers to map, and the pronoun them refers to rapids. The
difference in the singular it (map is singular) and the plural them (rapids is
plural) keeps readers from becoming confused.
Parallel Structures
Writers also use parallel structures to link content within and between
sentences. Like parallel lines, parallel structures in writing are aligned,
meaning that words, phrases, and sentences are grammatically similar, as
shown in the next pair of examples.
When you are planning to paddle down a river, get an accurate large-scale map and
mark the rapids on it. Study it and keep it handy. Rapids are caused by a drop in the
riverbed, so remember that you might not see them when you approach.
Survey respondents preferred ice fishing, skiing, snowboarding, and skating.
not
Survey respondents preferred ice fishing, skiing, snowboarding, and to skate.
424 | The Inside Track: Tech Writing Tips
The repeated grammatical structure helps to connect ideas.
Transitional Terms
Transitional terms (or transitions), the fourth technique for improving
coherence, are words or phrases that highlight the relationships between
ideas.
Below is a list of some transitional terms you might use. The column on the
left indicates the relationship the term implies in its connection.
MEANING
TRANSITIONAL TERMS
Addition
also, in addition, moreover, furthermore, and, as well as, besides
Contrast
but, however, yet, nevertheless, on the contrary, on the other hand
Time
before, after, currently, afterward, during, later, now, recently,
then, meanwhile, while, at the same time
Emphasis
in fact, of course, indeed, truly
Example
for instance, for example, to illustrate
Sequence
first, second, third, and so on; next; finally; last
Cause and effect
therefore, consequently, thus
Similarity
likewise, similarly, also, in the same way
The following paragraph shows how transitional terms can be used to
improve coherence.
As a parent, I care about the safety of my children. As a police officer, I care about the
rights of individuals. And as a citizen, I care about getting criminals off the streets.
not
As a parent, I care about the safety of my children. The rights of individuals is impor-
tant to me in my role as a police officer. Because I am a concerned citizen, I want to get
criminals off the streets.
This past summer I had guests from Sweden who told me about cooking in bed.
At first, I thought my friend sat in bed while preparing vegetables. No, she told me
that she literally cooks her food in bed while she goes to the beach. For example, she
starts potatoes on the stove and once the water is boiling, removes the pot from the
stove, places it in the bed, and surrounds it with blankets. The potatoes are done when
she returns a few hours later. However, I would be concerned about bacteria growing
during this kind of low-temperature slow cooking.
Effective Transitions | 425
The Inside Track: Your Turn
1. Identify transitional elements in the following passages.
a. A thunderstorm is a process. It begins with warm air rising. The storm
then feeds on moisture and heat. As the rising air becomes cooler, water
drops form from the condensing vapor. A picture of the air currents
inside a thunderhead could look like a nest of writhing snakes.
b. In 1940, Comity’s hired its fi rst female employee. In 1948, Comity’s
made that employee the company president.
c. The PTO shaft was slightly bent in the crash. Consequently, I cannot
operate the conveyor belt.
2. Revise the following sentences to create parallel structure.
a. With the new Najik, enjoy scanning that is faster, works more
precisely, and that can be more economical than ever before.
b. First is the group that reacts to the trend by selling every energy stock
in the portfolio. As a result of the trend, the second group responds
with a threat to sell every energy stock in the portfolio.
c. First, select a single or double mat for the print, and then the picture
will need a frame, and fi nally you must choose whether to use
nonglare or plain glass.
d. Security offi cers will be stationed in the following locations:
In the entrance foyer
◾
The computing center
◾
The president’s offi ce will be heavily guarded
◾
Two offi cers will be on the roof of the manufacturing building.
◾
e. According to some users, the Turbo 040 is the superior product; others
say the best machine is the ChipStar.
3. Combine each of the following groups of short, choppy sentences into a
single sentence by using transition strategies.
a. The veterinarian prescribed an anesthetic. The anesthetic was for the
dog. The pharmacy could not fi ll the prescription.
b. Sound waves that hit a plain wall bounce back to distort the sound.
Sonex-covered walls absorb sound waves that hit the walls. Absorbing
these waves enhances the sound.
c. The problem with the collating machine is worn gears. The mirrors on
the collating machine are scratched and are part of the problem. The
collating machine’s levers, which are bent, are a problem.
d. To apply for the position, job candidates must fi ll out an application
form. They must fi ll out the form completely. The candidates must
submit a resume. They must supply a list of three references.
426 | Glossary
A
abstracts short, concise versions of longer pieces of
communication; include only the most important
general information
academic writing the expository and persuasive writing
done in academic circles; examples include personal
essays, research papers, analyses, and arguments
accommodate to adjust; to change circumstances
so that others will be more comfortable or more at
ease
acronyms letters that stand for a long or complicated
term or series of terms
adrenaline a stimulant; something that excites and
creates extra energy
ambiguous more than one interpretation is possible;
describes writing that means different things to
different people
anecdote a humorous story
animation text or graphics that move
annotations handwritten notes, often placed in the
margins of a document being read
anticipate to guess or predict before actually reading
a passage what kind of reasoning it might present
appendix (plural, appendixes) usually the last
element or special part of a formal report; a place to
include documents, data, or graphics not necessary
to the discussion in the report but perhaps helpful or
interesting to the audience
archives collections or repositories of documents
auditory related to the sense of hearing or perceived
through the sense of hearing
B
background knowledge knowledge and vocabulary
that a reader has already learned and then calls upon
to better understand new information
bar graph a graph using a horizontal axis and a
vertical axis to compare numerical data presented in
rectangular bars
block letter style the letter style that aligns the return
address, dateline, and closing at the left margin
blog a website with periodic news or commentary
posted in reverse chronological order; short for
weblog
buffer something positive written to soften bad news
to come
C
callouts names of specifi c parts of a diagram that are
connected to the diagram or drawing with lines
cautions statements designed to keep a person from
harming the mechanism with which he or she is
working
chart a drawing with boxes, words, and lines to show
a process or an organizational structure
chronological resume a traditional resume that
provides a history of employment and education in
reverse chronological order
citations written indications of the sources for
borrowed materials
close-ended questions questions that restrict the
number of possible answers
code of ethics a written pledge to make responsible,
moral decisions
collaborative writing writing with others in
a group
conclusion the logical, inductive leap made after all
of the details of an experiment are considered; what
is learned from an experiment
concurrent testing determining the usefulness of
a product or an activity by observing someone’s
performance while he or she is using the product or
engaging in the activity
copyediting proofreading a document for correctness
in spelling, grammar, and mechanics
corporate code of ethics a document stating a
company’s commitment to ethical behavior; includes
core values, rules specifi c to the industry, and often
penalties for violations
Glossary
Glossary | 427
sent electronically as an e-mail resume, an
ASCII Text resume, a scannable resume, or an
online resume
embargo to withhold or delay publication of a
story
ethics a system of moral standards and rules that
guides human behavior
executive summary a short synopsis of the content
of a proposal that is written to meet the needs of a
busy decision maker; it is located after the table of
contents in a formal proposal
explanation information coming after a step that
provides additional data to clarify the step
exploding pie graph pie graph that separates, or
“explodes,”one wedge from the graph, drawing
attention to that piece of the pie
expository writing writing to explain or inform
expressive writing writing to express or portray
personal observation or feeling
external audience receivers outside the sender’s
organization; listeners outside an organization
F
FAQ an acronym for Frequently Asked Questions; a
document posted on the Internet containing answers
to common questions about a topic
feedback the verbal and nonverbal response to a
communication process or product
fi eld research research done in the fi eld, especially
through surveys and interviews
field-test to check instructions with a small
sample of people to see whether the instructions
are clear
fi scal year an organization’s operating year
fl owchart a drawing with lines and arrows to show a
process or series of steps
follow-up letter a letter thanking a prospective
employer for an interview
forensic reports investigative reports that analyze
evidence for legal purposes
formal outline a listing of main ideas and
subtopics arranged in a traditional format of
Roman numerals, capital letters, numbers, and
lowercase letters
cover letter a letter accompanying a resume that
highlights the applicant’s strengths
criteria the plural form of criterion; the factors on
which a decision is made; things to consider when
making a decision
culture the special beliefs, customs, or values that are
specifi c to a particular group of people or a particular
region
D
dateline the feature of a press release that identifi es
the location of a story
decision fl owchart a type of fl owchart that uses
symbols to indicate the critical steps in making a
decision
deductive reasoning reasoning from the general to
the particular
demographics defi ning characteristics of an audience;
information about a group such as the age, sex,
income, and educational level of its members
design elements considerations in writing a
document that affect page layout; the way a
document looks
diagram a line drawing
dignity a person’s sense of self-respect
direct approach a presentation strategy in which the
main idea is stated fi rst, then the idea is explained
and supported with details
direct quotation the use of borrowed ideas, words,
phrases, and sentences exactly as they appear in the
original source
discussion forum a website where users can
discuss items of interest or get specifi c questions
answered
documentation a system of giving credit for borrowed
ideas and words
draft an early version of a document that is subject to
change
drafting the stage after planning when the writer
actually writes a fi rst, second, or third (or later)
version of the document
E
electronic resume a chronological or functional
resume that is formatted so that it can be
428 | Glossary
I
icon a simple, easily recognizable picture or
drawing that represents an idea or a concept; often
used as a signal for recurring ideas or themes in a
document
imaginative writing writing such as novels, short
stories, drama, and poetry whose situations grow
out of fantasy or imagination; events and people are
fi ctional although the themes may reveal universal
truths
imperative mood the form of a verb that signals a
command or an instruction; the subject is “you” or
understood “you”
incident reports reports that objectively relate
the details of unusual events, such as accidents or
equipment malfunctions
indirect approach a presentation strategy in
which the main idea is not presented up front;
the speaker builds evidence to convince the audience
of his or her point
inductive reasoning reasoning from the particular to
the general
inferences judgments about a reading that the author
does not make for the reader
informal outline a listing of main ideas and subtopics
arranged in a less traditional format of single
headings and indented notes
informal presentations presentations that occur
without preparation or rehearsal
informal table a graphic that uses rows and columns
drawn without rules or stubs
instructions a sequence of steps explaining how to
complete a task
interactive refers to any document, such as a website,
that responds to user input
internal audience receivers inside the sender’s
organization; listeners within an organization
Internet a global system of networks connecting
computers through the World Wide Web, e-mail,
instant messaging, and other protocols
J
jargon the highly specialized language of a discipline
or technical fi eld
formal presentations presentations that are planned
in advance, carefully prepared and rehearsed, and
often accompanied by visual aids
formal table numerical information set up in rows and
columns and drawn with rules; used to present fi gures
format the details of a document’s arrangement:
the type of document, its length, the preferred
style manual, and its organization; the layout of
a publication; standard elements of a document’s
presentation
freewriting writing freely to discover an idea; can be
open (no topic yet), focused (on a topic), or looping
(stopping, summarizing, and continuing)
functional resume a nontraditional resume that
organizes information around a person’s unique skills
in order to highlight his or her special abilities or
experience
G
Gantt chart a type of bar graph used to schedule the
major tasks of a complex project; it uses bars to depict
the length of time needed to complete each task
goodwill a feeling of friendship; the value of doing
things that create mutual admiration and respect
graphic organizers the use of circles, rectangles,
and connecting lines in notes to show the relative
importance of one piece of information to another
graphics information presented in a visual form, such
as tables, graphs, and diagrams
groupthink the tendency of group members to
conform to the wishes of the group without thinking
through an issue individually
H
hierarchical order the order in which names are
listed from the top to the bottom of an organizational
chart
home page the fi rst page of a website
hooks in a news story, opening elements whose
purpose is to engage the reader, grab his or her
attention, and lead into the subject; attention-getters;
words or sentences designed to engage the reader or
to create interest in an idea
hyperlink a word, phrase, or graphic used to allow
readers of a web page to move easily to another page;
also called a link
Glossary | 429
online instructions instructions using computer
technology as the medium; include help menus,
CD-ROMs, and web-based instructions
online resume a type of electronic resume posted on
a website
open-ended questions questions that encourage the
respondent to provide any answer he or she likes; the
questions give no suggested answers
organizational chart a drawing with boxes,
words, and lines to show how an organization
is structured
P
pace to read effi ciently; to read at a rate that is slow
enough to allow the mind to absorb information but
fast enough to complete the reading assignment
pagination the assignment of sequential page
numbers within a document
parallel structure use of the same grammatical
structure of a phrase or sentence
paraphrase to present someone else’s ideas in your
own words, phrases, and sentence structure
passive voice the verb to be plus the past participle
of the verb; used in scientifi c writing to focus on the
process instead of the performer
periodic reports reports that explain the
accomplishments for all projects of a work group or
of an entire organization during the reporting period
periodicals materials published at specifi ed intervals
of time, such as magazines, journals, newsletters, and
newspapers
personal code of ethics a personal creed or philosophy
that expresses an individual’s core values
persuasive writing writing to convince others
pictograph a type of bar graph that uses pictures
instead of bars to represent data
pie graph a circular graph showing how parts relate
to the whole, which equals 100 percent
plagiarism the act of using another person’s words
and/or ideas without properly documenting their
source or giving credit
planning the fi rst stage of the writing process, during
which a writer thinks of an idea and plans how to
develop and research it
K
keywords important words, especially nouns, that
indicate subject areas in a web document; words in
a scannable resume that match the employer’s list of
key qualifi cations
L
letter of transmittal a letter formally or offi cially
conveying a formal report from the writers to the
external audience
limitations factors or situations that prevent problem
solving
line graph a graph using a horizontal axis and a
vertical axis to show a trend or relationship among
numbers
literary reading reading literature such as short
stories, essays, poetry, and novels
M
mechanism description a description of the main
parts of a device or machine; includes the purpose of
the device and an overall description, a description of
the parts, and the function of each part
media systems or means of mass communication
medium a means by which information is conveyed,
such as a newspaper article, a television commercial,
or a speech before a live audience
memo of transmittal a memo formally or offi cially
conveying a formal report from the writers to the
internal audience
modifi ed block letter style the letter style in which
the dateline and closing begin at the center of the
page
multiple audience an audience that includes readers
whose points of view differ
multiple bar graph a graph using horizontal and
vertical axes to compare data, drawn with more than
one bar for each measurement
multiple line graph a graph using more than one line
to compare data
O
objectivity an attitude signifying that no personal
bias or opinion has distorted or slanted a researcher’s
thinking
430 | Glossary
solution to a problem or need, helping the readers to
make a choice
recursive a circular or back-and-forth motion;
describes the movement of the writing process back
and forth between predictable stages
reliable data data that provide results that can be
duplicated under similar circumstances
reporting period the time span covered by a report
resignation letter a letter written to an employer or a
supervisor stating the writer’s intention to resign his
or her position with the company
respondents people chosen to answer questions
result an observable effect of an experiment
resume a one- or two-page summary of a person’s
job qualifi cations; uses elements of page design
to highlight the applicant’s most impressive
qualifi cations
retrospective testing checking the usefulness of a
product or an activity after someone has used the
product or performed the activity
reverse chronological order the organization of a
resume that presents information backward in time
revising reading a document and making changes in
content, organization, and word choice
RFPs an acronym for request for proposal; an
advertisement seeking proposals to solve a problem
or fi ll a need and often listing criteria for the solution
rhetorical question a question designed to provoke
thought; a question for which the speaker expects no
answer
rights personal freedoms that must be respected
role the function or job someone performs at work
RSS an acronym for Really Simple Syndication;
standardized web feed formats that allow blog posts
to be sent directly to readers
S
sample a subgroup with the same characteristics as
the entire population
scannable refers to text for the Web that allows
readers to locate important words and phrases
quickly, using short paragraphs and sentences,
headings, lists, and keywords
point-by-point organization a comparison/contrast
structure that covers two or three items under one
criterion
population the group from whom you want to
gather data
prefatory material parts or elements of a report
(letter or memo of transmittal, title page, and table of
contents) that come before the main text
previewing looking over a reading assignment before
reading it; determining the subject matter and any
questions about the material before reading it
primary audience the readers or listeners to whom
you are responsible fi rst; often the readers(s) who
requested or authorized the document
primary sources direct or fi rsthand reports of facts or
observations, such as an eyewitness account or a diary
principles rules that guide behavior
priority order the organization of a resume that
presents information from most important to least
important
progress reports reports that describe the work that
has been completed during a specifi ed time on only
one project
proposal a persuasive document that offers a solution
to an identifi ed problem or need
PSAs an acronym for public service announcements;
news published for the benefi t of the public
public relations plans or actions taken by an
individual or an organization to create a positive
relationship with the public
publishing sending a document to the person who
requested it
purpose a specifi c end or outcome to be obtained;
what you want your reader to do after reading your
document
R
rank the relative importance of one criterion to
another; usually ranked from most important to least
important
receptive audience readers who are open to ideas or
suggestions in a recommendation report
recommendation report a report that responds to a
need that arises in the workplace; it suggests the best
Glossary | 431
T
target audience the audience for which a message is
written; the audience with whom the writer seeks to
communicate
technical communication communication done in
the workplace; the subject is usually technical; the
purpose and audience are specifi c; the approach is
straightforward
technical reading reading science, business, or
technology publications
technical vocabulary specialized words used in
specifi c ways unique to a particular discipline
technical writing writing done in the workplace; the
subject is usually technical, written carefully for a
specifi c audience; the organization is predictable and
apparent; the style is concise; the tone is objective and
businesslike; special features include visual elements
tentative outline an informal, changeable plan for
organizing topics and subtopics
testimonials personal stories or people’s statements
(often from famous people) that endorse a product or
service
text fi le an ASCII plain text fi le that can be opened by
most word processing programs
tone emotional overtones; the way words make
readers feel
trip reports reports that tell what was accomplished
during a trip and what was learned from the trip
U
unreceptive audience readers who are not open to
ideas or suggestions
unsolicited refers to a document, such as a report,
that has not been asked for; the audience is not
expecting the recommendations
unsolicited letter a letter of application written for an
unadvertised position
unsolicited proposal a proposal in which the
writer identifi es a problem or need that he or she
discovered, explains it, and offers solutions
usability the ease with which an audience can access
and use a website
utility a means of evaluating actions based on what
will do the most good and the least harm
scannable resumes resumes written to be scanned
for keywords by an optical scanner
scientifi c method the use of both inductive and
deductive reasoning and a system of controls to
objectively explore natural phenomena
scope the extent of treatment, activity, or infl uence;
what is included and what is not included; what
you examine in your efforts to solve a particular
problem
secondary audience the reader(s) to whom you
are responsible after you have met the needs of the
primary audience
secondary sources indirect or secondhand reports of
information, such as the description of an event the
writer or speaker did not witness
shaping a step early in the writing process during
which a writer narrows a topic, determines a direction
for a topic, generates subtopics, and organizes the
subtopics
solicited refers to a document, such as a report, in
which readers ask for several alternatives
solicited letter a letter of application written for an
advertised position
solicited proposal a proposal that is written
in response to an RFP or upon the request of a
supervisor or manager
spatial order refers to mechanism descriptions that
explain the parts from left to right, right to left, top
to bottom, or bottom to top or in another logical
pattern
specifi c audience a single person or group whose
point of view is the same
standard a means of defi ning and limiting a
criterion
step one action in a set of instructions
style the way an author uses words and sentences
subcriteria smaller categories under a category that
help to defi ne each criterion
summarize to condense longer material, keeping
essential or main ideas and omitting unnecessary
parts such as examples and illustrations
summary a condensed version of a piece of
communication; includes general information and
may include a few important details
432 | Glossary
with a wide range of disabilities; websites should
follow the program’s Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines 2.0
whistle-blower a person who publicly alleges an
organization’s wrongful practices
wiki a website that allows users to author web pages
collaboratively
World Wide Web a collection of online resources
such as websites
writing process the stages a writer goes through to
write a document; includes planning (prewriting,
shaping, researching), drafting and revising, and
copyediting
V
valid data data that provide an accurate measurement
of what an individual intends to measure
values ideals that govern a person’s or an
organization’s actions
verbal tables tables that use words instead of numbers
and the information is given in rows and columns
W
warnings statements designed to keep a person from
being harmed
Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) a program
intended to make web content available to users
Index | 433
ASCII text resume, 259, 261
Asterisk (*), 255, 261
AT&T, Inc., 128
Audiences
designing for, 141
feedback from, 294
for instructions, 231–232
periodic reports formatted for, 195
for presentations, 282, 286–287
for recommendation reports, 309
for resumes, 253–254
for web writing, 169, 174
Audiences for technical writing, 12, 20–33
analyzing target, 26–29
Build Your Foundation feature, 40
Community Connection feature, 41
of correspondence, 108–110
document example for, 21
Focus on Technical Writing feature, 20
multiple, 30–33
specifi c needs of, 24–25
surveys of, 65
types of, 23–24
Write to Learn feature, 20
Writing at Work feature, 22
Your Turn feature, 41
Audio recorders, 293
Auditory information, 296
Authorship, as evaluation criterion, 44, 57, 59
A/V technology and communication careers, 136, 280
Axes, in graphs, 149
B
Background before new information, as
organization, 85
Background knowledge, 387, 391
Backing up fi les, 95
Backtracking, 237
Bacon, Francis, 15
Bad news, correspondence for, 124–125
Balloon help, 244
Bandwagon approach, ethics versus, 379
Banners, on web pages, 172
Bar graphs, 142, 149–150, 396
Bartleby.com, 49
Baucus, M. S., 378
A
Abbreviations, 392
Ab Initio quantum chemistry software, 218
Abstracts
in informative reports, 189–192
in proposals, 335, 343
Academic audiences, 22
Academic Search Premier databases, 49
Academic writing, 15
Accenture, Inc., 230
Accessibility, of websites, 173
Accomplishments, on resumes, 251
Accuracy, 44, 107
Acronyms, 395
Actions, instruction steps as, 238
Active voice, 218
Adobe Dreamweaver software, 170
Adobe PageMaker software, 12
Adverse reactions, in drug instructions, 241
Alignment, 143
Amazon’s Kindle electronic reader, 391
Ambiguous interpretations, 16
American Heritage Stedman’s Medical Dictionary, 49
American Institute of Graphic Arts (AIGA), 138
American Lung Association, 59
American Memory website, Library of Congress, 26
American Psychological Association, 37, 53–54
America’s Newspapers databases, 49
AmeriCorps, 101, 242
Analytical Chemistry, 217
Anderson, Paul V., 8
Anecdotes, in presentations, 288
Animation, 172
Annotating, in technical reading, 391–394
Anticipating, in technical reading, 387–388
Appearance, professional, 107
Appendixes
audience needs met by, 32
in proposals, 340, 342, 345, 357
in recommendation reports, 317–318
Approver, as audience role, 32
Approximation, in science lab reports, 218
Architecture and construction careers, 386
Archives, 47, 105
Arrows, in fl owcharts, 156
Articles (a, an, the), 238
Index
434 | Index
technical writing overview, 18
Web, writing for, 183–184
writing process, 100
Bulleted lists
in correspondence, 108, 112
in discussion forums, 182
for emphasis, 139, 255
guidelines for, 285
as special feature, 14
in trip reports, 215
Bulletin boards, electronic, 182
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of
Labor, 16
Burke, James, 367
Business letters, 8, 121. See also Resumes
Business Management and Administration, 250
C
Callouts, in diagrams, 159, 193
Capital letters, 138–139, 255, 285
Care, ethics and, 376
CareerOneStop website, 262
Careers. See Resumes; Writing at Work feature
Case studies, 307
Catalog of U.S. Government Publications, 51
Cause-to-effect order, as organization, 84–85,
219, 389
Cautions, in instructions, 233–234
CDs (compact disks), 35
Character, on resumes, 251
Charts, 142, 155–158
Chicago Manual of Style, The, 37, 53
Chronological order, as organization, 84, 256–257
Chronological resumes, 257–258
Citations, 44, 55–57
Clarity, 6
Classifying, as organization, 84
Clichés, avoiding, 176
Clinical trials, 219
Clip art, 14
Close-ended questions, 67
Cluster mapping, 83
Clusty.com, 50
CNN television, 201
Code of Ethics, 369–372
Collaborative writing, 79, 93–98
advantages of, 93–94
disadvantages of, 94–95
organizing, 95–97
wikis for, 181
work habits for, 97–98
BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation), 24
Beattie, Meredith, 328
BEL Group, The, 328
Bias
avoiding, 218
in commercial websites, 59
critical thinking to identify, 389
in language, 31
Bibliographies
in documentation, 54–55
in tables, 148
working, 43
Big Brothers, 101
BlackBerry handheld device, 128
BlackBerry User Guide, 229
Black box warning, for drugs, 241
Blackwell, Christopher, 22
Blaming, ethics versus, 379
Blind Copy, in e-mail, 112
Block letter style, 121
Blogs, 179–180
Body, of document, 87
Body of discussion, for proposals, 344, 351–353
Body language, 97
Boldface, to highlight, 139, 255, 261
BookShelved.com, 181
Borders, 173
Boulder Nonlinear Systems (BNS), 212
Brainstorming, 311
Brand Union, The, 307
Breadcrumb trail, for web pages, 171
Brief correspondence. See Correspondence
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 24
Britton, W. Earl, 16
Brown & Williamson Tobacco, 377
Budget, for proposals, 336
Buffer, in bad new correspondence, 124–125
Build Your Foundation feature
audience and purpose, 40
correspondence, 132
design of documents, 162
ethics, 380–381
informative reports, 208
instructions, 247–248
investigative reports, 225–226
presentations, 300
proposals, 359–360
recommendation reports, 323–324
resumes, 275–277
technical reading, 399
technical research, 74
Index | 435
technical research, 75
for technical writing overview, 19
writing for Web, 185
writing process, 101
Comparing and contrasting, as organization, 84,
318–319
Complaint, letters of, 125
Composition process, 12
Computer-based instructions, 243
Conclusions
on home page, 178
paragraphs for, 15, 87
in presentations, 291
in proposals, 336, 344, 354
in science lab reports, 217–218
in trip reports, 215
Concurrent fi eld testing, of instructions, 240
Confl ict, 94
Consequences, ethics and, 376
Consistency, ethics and, 376
Consumer Reports, 321
Contact information, 179, 205
Contemporary Authors, 57
Continuous connectivity, 128
Contracts, writing, 386
Contraindications, 241
Convincing readers, 126, 128. See also Persuasive
writing
Copyediting, 78, 90–91
Copyright laws, 58, 170
Correspondence, 47, 102–133
audience for, 108–110
bad news, 124–125
Build Your Foundation feature, 132
Community Connection feature, 133
effective, 106–107
Focus feature, 102
formatting, 115–122
goodwill in, 106
informative and good news, 122–123
letter example, 104
memo example, 103
persuasive, 125–130
prewriting, 110–114
for proposals, 340
tone and humor in, 107–108
Write to Learn feature, 102
Writing at Work feature, 105
Your Turn feature, 132–133
Council of Science Editors (CSE), 53–53
Counter Culture Coffee, Inc., 6
Color, 14
in fl owcharts, 156
in graphics, 144–145
for websites, 174
Colorado State University, 114
Columns, 14
Communication Dilemma feature
audiences, 36
blog content, 180
collaborative writing, 98
color in different cultures, 145
e-mail, company, 112
incident reports, 222
marketing, 13
permission to publish, 53
plagiarism, 281
progress reports, 200
proposals, 341
recommendation reports, 311
resumes, honesty on, 264
sympathy, 376
technical reading, 389
training, 244
Communication Technologies feature
desktop publishing software, 12
electronic readers, 391
handheld, wireless computers, 128
image and graphics websites, 144
library access, 48
LinkedIn.com, 261
news, versions of, 24
proposals, 343
recommendation reports, 319
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feed, 174
scientifi c research, 218
training with interactive video, 242
virtual offi ce space, 297
word processing guidelines, 95
Community Connection feature
audience and purpose, 41
correspondence, 133
design of documents, 163
ethics, 383
informative reports, 209
instructions, 248
investigative reports, 227
presentations, 301
proposals, 361
recommendation reports, 325
resumes, 277–278
technical reading, 401
436 | Index
icons, 159
photographs, 160
tables, 146–148
text integration with, 143–144
overview, 137
purpose of, 141–142
for Web, 172–174
Write to Learn feature, 134
Writing at Work feature, 136
Your Turn feature, 162–163
Desktop publishing software, 12, 14
Diagrams, 32, 142, 159, 234, 396
Diamond shapes, in fl owcharts, 156
Dickinson, Emily, 16
Digital Book, Sony, 391
Digital planning systems, 230
Dignity, ethics and, 375
Direct approach, in presentations, 287
Disabilities, web accessibility and, 173
Disclaimers, on websites, 179
Discussion forums, 182
Distinguishing subject, of memos, 118
Distortion, in graphs, 158
Documenting, 52–57, 105. See also Technical
research
Double bar graphs, 150
Download time, 172
Drafting
example of, 77
proposals, 336–339
saving fi les in, 95
in writing process, 86–87
Drawings, 14
Drop-down menus, 171
Drug packaging, warnings on, 241
Dry erase boards, 284
E
eBay.com, 167
EBSCOhost databases, 49
Education, on resumes, 251, 255
EFD (Electrofl uidic Display Technology), 391
Electronic bulletin boards, 182
Electronic readers, 391
Electronic resumes, 259–263
Electronic sources, 49–52, 59–60
Elements, design, 138–140
Ellipsis (. . .), 63–64
Elsevier databases, 49
E-mail
audiences for, 109
bad news, 126
Coverage, as evaluation criterion, 58–59
Cover letters, 251, 267–271
Cover memos, 32
Credibility, 52, 203
Credit for ideas, 52
Criteria
in evaluating sources, 44
in proposals, 332–333
in recommendation reports, 308, 311–313, 318–321
Criticism, 97
Cultural differences
business and, 26
color in, 145
presentations and, 298
in target audiences, 27–29, 41
as workplace research subject, 47
Culture of ethics, 367–372
Cut-and-paste patchwork of quotations, 63
Cyborlink website, 26
D
Dashes, 261
Data encryption, 212
Dateline
in memos, 117–118
in news releases, 206
Decimals, alignment of, 143
Decision fl owcharts, 142, 155–156
Decision maker, as audience role, 32
Deductive reasoning, 217
Deep Web, 50
Defense mechanisms, ethics versus, 379
Defi nitions, in proposals, 341–342
Delivering presentations, 295
Demographics, 25, 41, 169
Demonstrations, 284
Denial, ethics versus, 379
Dependent variables, in graphs, 149
Depth, as evaluation criterion, 58–59
Design, website, 60
Design of documents, 134–163
audience and, 141
Build Your Foundation feature, 162
Community Connection feature, 163
elements in, 138–140
example of, 135
Focus feature, 134
graphics in, 143–160
charts, 155–158
color, 144–145
diagrams, 159
graphs, 148–155
Index | 437
Expanding searches, 51
Experience, on resumes, 251, 256
Experimentation, 71–72
Experts, as readers, 24
Explanations, in instructions, 234, 238–240
Exploded graphics, 193
Exploding pie graphs, 155
Expository writing, 11
Expressive writing, 11
Extenuating circumstances, ethics and, 376
External audiences, 109, 281
External proposals, 330
F
Facebook.com, 167
FAFSA (Free Application for Federal Student Aid)
forms, 164–165
False sense of security, ethics versus, 379
Falsifying employment data, 269
Familiar to less familiar, as organization, 85
FAQs (frequently asked questions), 178, 180–181
Fastow, Andrew, 366
Feasibility reports, 30
Feedback, 294
Field research, 11, 64
Field testing instructions, 240–243
Finance communication, 105
Financial facts, to support topic, 87
Financial reports, 8
Firefi ghter code of ethics, 371–372
Firefox web browser, 50
Flaming, in e-mail, 113
Flickr.com, 167
Flip charts, 286
Flowcharts, 142, 155–156, 170, 234, 396
Focused freewriting, 81–82
Focusing subject, of memos, 118
Focus on Ethics feature
biased language, 31
checking sources, 397
copyright laws, 58, 170
cultural differences, 296
falsifying employment data, 269
“fudging” data, 219
graph scales, 158
proposals, 333
proprietary information in e-mail, 129
releasing information to the media, 206
stakeholder interests, 311
trust in groups, 96
warnings on drug packaging, 241
withholding information, 14
cover letter sent via, 270
ethical issues in, 129
formatting, 115
misdirected, 108
overview, 106
permanent record of, 6
planning, 111–114
resume sent as, 259–260
to stakeholders, 105
See also Correspondence
Embargo, on new releases, 205
Emoticon symbols, 113
Emotion, 13, 113, 218
Empathy, ethics and, 376
Emphasis
capital letters for, 138
color for, 144
lists for, 138–139, 166, 255
text effects for, 139
Employment communication. See Resumes
Employment Law Training, Inc., 250
Encryption, data, 212
Encyclopedia Britannica, 49
Encyclopedia of Educational Technology, 49
Encyclopedia of Information Ethics and
Security, 49
Ending news releases (-30- or ###), 206
End users, 32
English usage, 15, 107, 152, 176, 182
Enron, Inc., scandals at, 366, 377
Entrepreneurship Worldwide, 57
Erdmann, Saren, 105
Essay, personal, 5, 12–13
Estimates, to support topic, 87
Ethics, 362–383
benefi ts of, 365–366
Build Your Foundation feature, 380–381
Community Connection feature, 383
culture of, 367–372
diffi culties in, 378–379
dilemmas of, 372–378
in double checking data, 389
Focus feature, 362
STC Ethical Principles for Technical Communicators,
Write to Learn feature, 362
Writing at Work feature, 364
Your Turn feature, 381–383
See also Focus on Ethics feature
Ethics Resource Center, 367, 369, 376
Evidence, 22, 221, 223
Executive summaries, 32, 330, 343, 349
438 | Index
“Fudging” data, 219
Functional resumes, 257–259
G
Gale databases, 49
Gantt, Henry, 157
Gantt charts, 142, 157–158, 396
Gates, Bill, 53
General-to-specifi c, as organization, 85
Gerber Foods, 59
GIF (Graphics Interchange Format), 172
Global communication, 297
Glossaries, 340, 344–345, 355
Golden Rule, 365
Good news, correspondence for, 122–123
Goodwill, 106
Goodwin, Doris Kearns, 52
Google.com, 50, 167
Google Groups, 182
Google News, 24
Government and public administration careers, 328
Grammar checker, 91
Grant proposals, 328, 330–331
Graphic organizers, 393
Graphics
for “branding,” 179
charts, 155–158
color in, 144–145
complex information in, 13–14
diagrams, 159
graphs, 148–155
icons, 159
in instructions, 234
in mechanism descriptions, 193
overview, 140
photographs, 160
for presentations, 279, 283–285, 295–297
in proposals, 341–342
tables, 146–148
in technical reading, 396–397
text integration with, 143–144
on web pages, 172
See also Design of documents
Graphs, 148–155
bar, 149–150
line, 151–152
overview, 142
pictograph, 152–153
pie, 153–155
purpose of, 396
scales for, 158
Focus features
brief correspondence, 102
design and graphics, 134
ethics in the workplace, 362
informative reports, 186
instructions, 228
investigative reports, 210
presentations, 278
proposals, 326
recommendation reports, 302
technical reading, 384
technical research, 42
technical writing
audience and purpose, 20
resumes, 248
technical writing overview, 2
writing for Web, 164
writing process, 76
Follow-up letters, 251, 271–272
Fonts, type, 138, 173, 259
Font size, 140, 285
Forecasting topics, in introductions, 87
Forensic reports, 221–224
For Immediate Release, on new releases, 205
Formal outlines, 392
Formal presentations, 281
Formal proposals, 330, 340–357
example of, 346–357
parts of, 342–345
prewriting, 340–342
Formal tables, 142, 147–148
Formatting
conventional, 107
correspondence, 115–122
instructions, 234–236
media and, 36
periodic reports, 195
proposals, 331–332
resumes, 254–256
simple, 112
Forwarding e-mail, 112
Forward in time, as instruction step order, 237
Foundation Center, The, 330
Fragmented writing, 94
Franklin, Benjamin, 63
Freas, Stephen, 386
Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA)
forms, 164–165, 167
Free association, 82
Freewriting, 81–82, 86
Frequently asked questions (FAQs), 178
FROM line, in memos, 117
Index | 439
Informal outlines, 392
Informal presentations, 281
Informal proposals, 330, 334–339
Informal tables, 142, 146–147
Informal writing style, 107
Information overload, 48
Information technology careers, 6, 22, 44, 78, 230
Informative correspondence, 122–123
Informative reports, 186–209
Build Your Foundation feature, 208
Community Connection feature, 209
Focus feature, 186
mechanism description in, 192–195
news releases as, 201–206
periodic, 195–198
on progress, 198–201
summary and abstract in, 189–192
technical description example, 187
Write to Learn feature, 186
Writing at Work feature, 188
Your Turn feature, 208–209
Instant messages, 105
Instructional design and technology careers, 49
Instructions, 228–249
audience for, 231–232
Build Your Foundation feature, 247–248
Community Connection feature, 248
design of, 137
example of, 229
explanations in, 239–240
fi eld tests of, 240–243
Focus feature, 228
formatting, 234–236
online, 243–245
organizing, 233–234
planning, 232
steps in, 237–238
Write to Learn feature, 228
Writing at Work feature, 230
Your Turn feature, 248
Integration, in proposals, 343
Interactive nature, of Internet, 167
Interactive video, training with, 242
Interactive white boards, 281
Interest level, of target audience, 27, 29
Internal audiences, 109, 281
Internal progress reports, 199
Internal proposals, 330
International date style, 117–118
Internet, 48–50. See also Net Bookmark feature;
Web, writing for
Internet Explorer web browser, 50
Grey, Aidan, 136
Grolier Online Encyclopedia, 49
Group presentations, 296–298
Groupthink, 94
H
Hackers, 112
Handheld computing devices, 128, 391
Handouts, 284–285, 297–298
Hard copy form, 47–48
Harvard University, 52
Headings
choosing, 85
designing, 139
in proposals, 334, 343
in resumes, 255–256
on web pages, 172, 176–177, 182
Health science careers, 188
Heller, Paige, 188
Hemingway, Ernest, 16
Hierarchical order, in memos, 116
Highlighting features, 139
Historical facts, to support topic, 87
Home&Abroad (H&A) website, 136
Home pages, 168, 171, 178–179
Hooking attention, 126–128, 204
Hoover’s 500: Profi les of America’s Largest Business
Enterprises, 252
Hospitality and tourism, 166
Houck, Kate, 250
HowStuffWorks.com, 167
http (hypertext transfer protocol), 50
Humor, in correspondence, 107–108
Hype, avoiding, 174
Hyperlinks, on web pages, 170–171
Hyphens, 261
Hypothesis testing, 217
I
Icons, 142, 159
Ideas, 52, 106
Identifi cation, on resumes, 255
Image and graphics websites, 144
Imaginative writing, 16
Imperative mood, 237
Incident reports, 211, 213–214, 222
Independent variables, in graphs, 149
Indexes, 49
Indirect approach, in presentations, 288
Inductive reasoning, 217
Inferences, drawing, 16
Infomine index, 50
440 | Index
Kindle electronic reader, 391
Knowledge, background, 387, 391
Knowledge level, 26, 29, 44
L
Lab reports, 8, 217–220
Land breeze example, 388
Language
biased, 31
body, 97
concise, 107
English usage, 15, 107, 152, 176, 182
specifi c versus vague, 265
Lay readers, 24
LCD projectors, 281, 298
Left-justifi ed text, 138
Legends, for graphics, 396
Letterhead, 14, 205
Letters
audiences for, 110
of complaint, 125
cover, 251, 267–271
example of, 104
follow-up, 251, 271–272
formatting, 119–122
overview, 8, 106
planning, 114
for proposal transmittal, 342, 346
of resignation, 251, 271–273
sales, 130
See also Correspondence
Leuner, Rick, 364
LexisNexis databases, 49
Librarian’s Internet Index, 50
Library catalogs, 47–48
Library of Congress, 26, 48
Limitations, for proposals, 335
Limiting searches, 51
Line drawings, 142, 159
Line graphs, 142, 151–152, 396
Line length, for web pages, 172
Line of reasoning, 388
LinkedIn.com, 261
Links, to websites, 60, 178
Linnenberger, Anna, 212
Lists
in discussion forums, 182
for emphasis, 139, 255, 285
long sentences versus, 12
paragraphs replaced by, 177
in presentations, 285
in scientifi c lab reports, 219
Interviews, 68–70, 269
Intranets, 297
Introductions
audience needs met by, 32
on home page, 178
in instructions, 234
paragraphs for, 15
to presentations, 288–289
for proposals, 335, 344, 350
purpose of, 86–87
to science lab reports, 217
Inverted pyramid writing strategy, 174, 182
Investigative reports, 210–227
Build Your Foundation feature, 225–226
Community Connection feature, 227
Focus feature, 210
forensic reports, 221–224
incident reports, 211, 213–214
science lab reports, 217–220
trip reports, 215–216
Write to Learn feature, 210
Writing at Work feature, 212
Your Turn feature, 227
Invisible Web, 50
Italics, to highlight, 139, 255, 261
J
Jargon, 12, 26
Jim Lehrer News (PBS), 52
Job hunting services, online, 264. See also Resumes
Johnson, Lyndon B., 52
Johnson & Johnson Co., Inc., 367–368
Journaling, 81–83
Journal of Applied Physics, 24
Journal of Forensic Sciences, 217
Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA),
JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) format, 172
Judgments, evidence for, 221
Justice, ethics and, 375
Justifi cation, for proposals, 336
K
Kantin, Bob, 313
Key Contact, on new releases, 205
Keys, to legends, 396
Keywords
in fi rst 50 words of website, 177
in instructions, 244
in resumes, 261, 266
scanning web pages for, 167
searching with, 48, 51–52
Index | 441
Morse code, 24–25
Most important to least important, as organization, 85
Motivation, 94, 126, 129
MTV television, 201
Multimedia, 172, 284
Multiple audiences, 25, 30–33
Multiple bar graphs, 142, 150
Multiple line graphs, 142, 151–152
N
NAI Realvest, 364
NAR Code of Ethics, 364
National Association of Realtors (NAR), 364
National Business Ethics Survey, 367
National Rifl e Association, 59
Navigation, 44, 179, 244
Navigation bar, 171
NCIS (television program), 221
Near, J. P., 378
Net Bookmark feature
American Institute of Graphic Arts (AIGA), 138
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 16
cultural differences, 26
Ethics Resource Center, 376
Merriam-Webster Online dictionary, 91
Occupational Outlook Handbook, U.S. Department
of Labor, 258
Onlinenewspapers.com, 396
Plain Language Action and Information Network
(PLAIN), 239
presentation software, 298
proposals, 330
recommendation reports, 313
stylebook websites, 53
technical communication, 170
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 200, 219
Writing@CSU.com, 114
Netiquette, 113
New Jersey Teen Driver Study Commission, 319
News, versions of, 24
Newspapers, design of, 137
Newspaper Source Plus databases, 49
News releases, 201–206
Newsweek, 48
New York Times, The, 48, 137
Nickel, Anne, 307
Nonnative speakers of English, 152
Notetaking
for presentations, 285, 290–292
in research, 61–64
SOAP formula for, 188
in technical reading, 394
as special feature, 14
in technical writing, 166
in trip reports, 215
LISTSERV groups, 114
Literary versus technical reading, 387–390
Logos, 14, 179
Looping, as freewriting, 81–82
Lowercase letters, 138
Luongo, Michael, 166
M
Managers, 24, 32
Maple software, 218
Mapping, 81, 83–84, 393
Margins, 261
Marketing, 6, 307
Materials and methods, in science lab reports, 217
Materials and tools, in instructions, 234
Mathcad software, 218
McTaggart, Lynne, 52
Mechanism descriptions, 187, 192–195
Media, new releases for, 201
Medium for document, 35–38, 140. See also
Audiences for technical writing
Medpedia.com, 181
Memos
audience needs met by, 32
audiences for, 109
example of, 103
formatting, 115–119
overview, 106
planning, 114
for proposal transmittal, 342, 346
Merriam-Webster Online, 49, 91
Messages. See Correspondence
Metaphors, 44
Methodology, in proposals, 336
Methods, in forensic reports, 223
Methods and resources, 58
Miami University (Oxford, Ohio), 44
Microsoft Corporation, 53
Microsoft Expression Web 3 software, 170
Microsoft PowerPoint software, 134, 290, 298
Microsoft Word software, 12, 95, 115, 259, 313
Minimalist writing style, 212
Mirrors, for rehearsing presentations, 293
Misdirected e-mail, 108
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers, 37, 53
Modern Language Association (MLA), 37, 53–55
Modifi ed block letter style, 121
Molecular modeling programs, 218
Monster Career Tools website, 262
442 | Index
Paraphrasing, 55, 62, 189, 192
Parentheses, 143
Parrish, Sonya, 44
Passive voice, 218
Patchwork of quotations, 63
Patterns, for websites, 173
PBS (Public Broadcasting System), 52
Performance, technology for, 49
Periodicals, 47–49
Periodic informative reports, 195–198
Permission to publish, 53
Personal appearance, 291
Personal essay, 5, 12–13
Personality, of target audience, 28–29
Personality traits, on resumes, 251
Persuasive writing
in correspondence, 125–130
overview, 15
in proposals, 328, 334, 340–341
in recommendation reports, 307, 309
Photographs, 14, 142, 160
Pictographs, 142, 152–153
Pie graphs, 142, 153–155, 396
PIN (personal identifi cation number), 167
Plagiarism, 52, 91, 281
Plain Language Action and Information Network
(PLAIN), 239
Planning. See Presentations; Prewriting; Writing
process
PNG (Portable Network Graphics) format, 172
Point-by-point organization, 316
Points, as type size, 138
Poor Richard’s Almanac (Franklin), 63
Popular Science, 24
Populations, for surveys, 64
Power surges and outages, 95
Precautions, in instructions, 241
Precision, in science lab reports, 218
Predicting subject, of memos, 118
Prefatory material, in proposals, 345
Presentations, 278–301
audiences for, 282
body of, 289
Build Your Foundation feature, 300
Community Connection feature, 301
conclusion for, 289
delivering, 295
Focus feature, 278
graphics for, 279, 283–285
group, 296–298
introduction to, 288–289
location for, 286–287
Nouns and nouns plus descriptive phrases word
choices, 263
Numbered lists, 14, 139
###, to end news releases, 206
Numerical data, 397
O
Obama, Barack, 109
Objectivity, 44, 72, 218
Objects, 284
Observations, 70–71, 223
Occupational Outlook Handbook, U.S. Department of
Labor, 258
Offi ce space, virtual, 297
Old Man and the Sea, The (Hemingway), 16
Omissions from quotations, 63–64
Online Computer Library Center (OCLC), 48–49
Online instructions, 243–245
Onlinenewspapers.com, 396
Online resume, 259, 262–263
Open-ended questions, 67
Open freewriting, 81–82
Optical tweezers, 212
Organization
cause-to-effect, 389
color to indicate, 144
of documents, 84–85
of instructions, 233–234
of presentations, 287–288
of recommendation reports, 313–318
of resumes, 256–257
of science lab reports, 217
of technical writing, 12
in writing for Web, 169–171
Organizational charts, 142, 156–157
Outlines
from cluster maps, 84–86
as draft substitute, 78
for presentations, 280, 290–292
for recommendation reports, 313–316
in technical reading, 392
tentative, 84
Oval shapes, in fl owcharts, 156
Overbay, Mark, 6
P
Page layouts, for web pages, 172
Page numbers, in proposals, 345
Pagination, in proposals, 343
Palm TREO or PRO, 128
Paragraphs, 15, 176–177
Parallel structure, 85, 265–266
Index | 443
primary audiences for, 31
problem-solving strategy for, 332–333
Write to Learn feature, 326
Writing at Work feature, 328
Your Turn feature, 360–361
ProQuest databases, 49
PSAs (public service announcements), 201
Psychology Today, 24
Publication dates, 57
Publication Manual of the American Psychological
Association, 37, 53
Public Broadcasting System (PBS), 52
Public domain, 53
Public relations, 201
Publishing, 53, 91–92
Pulitzer Prize, 52
Punctuation, 121, 261, 266–267
Purpose
of design, 141–142
of document, 33–34, 38, 40–41
on home page, 178
of website, 60
in writing for Web, 168
See also Audiences for technical writing
Q
Quantitative scales, for graphs, 158
QuarkXPress software, 12
Questionnaires, 243
Questions
for interviews, 69
in notetaking, 394
in presentations, 298
for revising, 89
rhetorical, 288
to shape ideas, 83
for surveys, 66–67
Quotations
citations for, 55
for informative reports, 192
in notetaking, 63–64
to support topic, 87
R
Ragged right text, 138
Ranking criteria, 318
Rationalization, ethics versus, 379
Readability, 89, 145, 166, 285
Readers. See Audiences for technical writing
Reading. See Technical reading
Reasoning, 217, 388
Receptive audiences, 309
Microsoft PowerPoint software for, 134, 290, 298
organization of, 287–288
outlines and notes for, 290–292
overview, 281
personal appearance in, 291
rehearsing, 293–294
room check for, 294–295
stage fright and, 287
summarizing, 189
time expectations for, 287
topics for, 283
website, 60
Write to Learn feature, 278
Writing at Work feature, 280
Your Turn feature, 300–301
Press releases, 201–206
Previewing technical reading, 387
Prewriting, 110–114, 340–342
Primary audiences, 30
Primary sources, 64–72
defi nition of, 46
example of, 44
experimentation, 71–72
interviews, 68–70
observation, 70–71
surveys, 64–68
Principles, ethical, 365, 376
Print form, 47–48
Priority order, as organization, 257
Privacy, 112, 114, 179
Problem and solution, as organization, 84–85
Problem-solving strategy, for proposals, 332–333
Procedures, 32
Processes, description of, 219
Production artists, technical writers as, 14
Professional appearance, 107
Professions, writing in, 7. See also Writing at Work
feature
Progress reports, 198–201
Project management, 105
Proportions, in graphs, 158
Proposals, 9, 326–361
Build Your Foundation feature, 359–360
Community Connection feature, 361
description of, 329–331
example of, 327
Focus feature, 326
formal, 340–357
example of, 346–357
parts of, 342–345
prewriting, 340–342
informal, 334–339
444 | Index
Focus on Technical Writing feature, 248
follow-up letters and, 271–272
formatting, 254–256
functional, 258–259
keywords in, 266
organization of, 256–257
prospective employer research for, 252
punctuation in, 266–267
references for, 252–253
resignation letters and, 271–273
strength assessment for, 251–252
word choices for, 263–266
Write to Learn feature, 248
Writing at Work feature, 250
Your Turn feature, 277
Retrospective fi eld testing, of instructions, 243
Revenge, ethics versus, 379
Reverse chronological order, as organization, 256–257
Revising, 87–89
RFP (request for proposal), 331–332
Rhetorical questions, 288
Rights, ethics and, 375
Roget’s Thesaurus, 91
Role, of target audience, 27, 29, 32
Room check, for presentations, 294–295
Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, 78
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feed, 174, 180
S
Sales catalogs, 8
Sales letter, 130
Sales proposals, 313, 331
Samples, for surveys, 64
San Diego State University, 49
Sans serif type fonts, 138
Satellite laser communications, 212
Saving work, 95
Scannable resume, 259, 261–262
Scannable text, 167, 176–178
Scenarios, 22
Schedules, 157–158, 336
Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
careers, 212
Science lab reports, 217–220
Scientifi c method, 217
Scope of documents, 34, 38, 315, 335. See also
Audiences for technical writing
Scrolling, 122
Sea breeze example, 388
Search engines, 50
Searching, 48, 171, 244. See also Primary sources;
Secondary sources
Recommendation reports, 302–325
appendixes in, 317–318
Build Your Foundation feature, 323–324
Community Connection feature, 325
comparison and contrast in, 316–317
criteria in, 311–313, 318–321
description of, 308–310
example of, 303–306
Focus feature, 302
outlining, 313–316
problem defi nition in, 310–311
solution brainstorming in, 311
Write to Learn feature, 302
Writing at Work feature, 307
Your Turn feature, 324
Recommendation Reports and Internal Politics
(Kantin), 313
Recommendations, in trip reports, 215
Recording observations, 70
Rectangles, in fl owcharts, 156
Recursive writing, 80
References
general materials, 47, 49
in resumes, 252–253
for website support, 60
Rehearsing presentations, 280–281, 293–294
Relevance, as evaluation criterion, 44
Reliability, 72
Reply All, in e-mail, 112
Reporting period, 198
Reports. See Informative reports; Investigative reports;
Recommendation reports
Reputation, 52, 57
Research papers
audience for, 12
example of, 4
purpose of, 11
for recommendation reports, 321
as technical writing, 8
See also Technical research
Research proposals, 331
Resignation letters, 251, 271–273
Respondents, to surveys, 64
Results and discussion, in science lab reports, 217–218
Resumes, 248–277
Build Your Foundation feature, 275–277
chronological, 258
Community Connection feature, 277–278
cover letters with, 267–271
electronic, 259–263
employer reading of, 253–254
example of, 249
Index | 445
Subject line, in memos, 118–119
Subjects of technical writing, 11
Substeps, in instructions, 238
Summaries
citations for, 55
in cover letters, 268
in informative reports, 189–192
in looping technique, 82
in notetaking, 61–62
in proposals, 335, 343, 349
Superlatives, avoiding, 203
Supplemental materials, in proposals,
341–342
Supply and demand relationship, 25
Surveys, 64–68, 243
Symbols, in fl owcharts, 156
Synonyms, 91
Systematic observations, 71
T
Table of contents, 343, 348
Tables
constructing, 146–148
numbering, 143
overview, 142
purpose of, 396
types of, 14
on websites, 173
Tabulation, of surveys, 67
Target audiences, 25–29
Teams. See Collaborative writing
Technical communication, 7
Technical Communication: A Reader-Centered
Approach (Anderson), 8
Technical reading, 384–401
aloud, 394
annotating in, 391–394
background knowledge in, 391
Build Your Foundation feature, 399
Community Connection feature, 401
example of, 385
Focus feature, 384
graphics in, 396–397
journal of, 83
literary reading versus, 387–390
numerical data in, 397
pacing yourself, 391
vocabulary in, 394–395
web pages, 167–168
Write to Learn feature, 384
Writing at Work feature, 386
Your Turn feature, 399–401
Secondary audiences, 30
Secondary sources
defi nition of, 46
documenting, 52–57
evaluating, 44, 57–60, 397
researching, 44
searching, 47–52
working bibliography of, 54–55
Security, 112, 114, 179
Sentences, 12, 176, 237
Serif type fonts, 138
Sexist language, 31
Shading, in bar graphs, 150
Shaping ideas, 83–86
Sidebars, 14
Simplest to most complex, as organization, 85
SIRS databases, 49
Site map, 171
Skills, on resumes, 251
Slides, 284–285. See also Presentations
SMART Board interactive white boards, 281
SOAP formula (subjective, objective, assessment,
plan) for notes, 188
Society for Technical Communication (STC), 362–363
Solicited cover letters, 267–268
Solicited proposals, 330–331
Solicited recommendation reports, 308
Sony’s Reader Digital Book, 391
SOPs (standard operating procedures), 8
Sources. See Primary sources; Secondary sources
Spatial order, as organization, 84, 193
Special features, in technical writing, 13–15
Specifi c audiences, 25
Spell-checker, 90–91
Stage fright, 287
Stakeholders, 105, 311
Standards, for criteria, 318
Standard symbols, in fl owcharts, 156
Standard usage, 15, 107, 176, 182
Statistics, 87, 307
STC Ethical Principles for Technical Communicators,
Steps, in instructions, 237–238
Stereotypes, 31
Stress, ethics versus, 379
Stubs, in verbal tables, 148
Style
guidelines for, 37, 53, 91
international date, 117–118
for letters, 121–122
minimalist, 212
of technical writing, 12, 14–15
446 | Index
Thesaurus, 91
Thesis, development of, 15
Think Critically feature
blog content, 180
composition process, 12
continuous connectivity, 128
cultural differences, 296
electronic readers, 391
ethical behavior, 364
falsifying employment data, 269
“fudging” data, 219
information overload, 48
instruction writing, 230
LinkedIn.com, 261
mission statement, 212
news, versions of, 24
progress reports, 200
proposals, 328, 333, 341, 343
recommendation reports, 307, 309, 319
resumes, 250, 264
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feed, 174
SOAP formula (subjective, objective, assessment,
plan) for notes, 188
technical reading, 386, 389
trend exaggeration, 158
trust in groups, 96
warnings on drug packaging, 241
-30-, to end news releases, 206
Time expectations, for presentations, 287
Titles
of graphics, 144, 396
of proposals, 342–343, 347
of websites, 174, 182
TNN television, 201
TO line, in memos, 116–117
Tone
of correspondence, 107–108
of proposals, 340
of technical writing, 13
Topics
choosing, 81–83
for group presentations, 298–299
for presentations, 285
Topic sentences, 12
To verbs plus what phrases, 219
Training, 49, 242, 244
Transitions, 12, 285, 297
Translation, 81
Transparencies, graphics on, 284
Transparency, of writers, 23
Transportation, distribution, and logistics careers, 364
Travel writing, 166
Technical research, 42–75
Build Your Foundation feature, 74
Community Connection on, 75
Focus feature, 42
notetaking in, 61–64
primary data collecting in, 64–72
experimentation, 71–72
interviews, 68–70
observation, 70–71
surveys, 64–68
secondary data collecting in
documenting, 52–57
searching for, 47–52
source evaluation, 57–60
at work, 45–47
working bibliography example for, 43
Write to Learn feature, 42
Writing at Work feature, 44
Your Turn feature, 75
Technical vocabulary, 394–395
Technical writing, overview of, 2–19
academic writing versus, 15
Build Your Foundation feature, 18
characteristics of, 11–15
Community Connection feature, 19
defi nition, 7–8
document sample, 3
Focus feature, 2
imaginative writing versus, 16
need for, 8–10
personal essay sample, 5
research paper sample, 4
Write to Learn feature, 2
Writing at Work feature, 6
Your Turn feature, 19
Technician role, 24, 32
Telephone calls, 105
Templates, for memos, 115
Tentative outlines, 84
Testimonials, 87, 128
Text
color to support, 145
as design element, 138–139
fonts for, 138, 173
graphics integrated with, 143–144
scannable, 167, 176–178
Text fi les, 259
Text messages
audiences for, 108–109
formatting, 115
overview, 106
planning, 111–114
Index | 447
document types, 11
errors, 90
ethics, 367, 372, 378
formatting, 115
grade reports, 198
graphics, 141, 143, 146
group presentations, 296
ideas, credit for, 52
incident reports, 213
informative reports, 189
instructions, 231–232, 236
judgments based on evidence, 221
mechanism description, 192
messages, 122, 287
misdirected e-mail, 108
newspaper design, 137
news releases, 201
notetaking, 61
periodic reports, 195
persuasive writing, 334
planning, 81, 110
presentations, 281, 293, 294
problem defi nition, 310
professions and writing, 7
proposals, 329, 340
public speaking, 282, 289
recommendation reports, 308, 313, 318
research, 64
resumes, 251, 254, 257
science lab reports, 217
sharing ideas, 106
source evaluation, 57
teams, working in, 93
technical reading, 387, 391
trip reports, 215
websites, 167, 169, 174, 178
workplace research, 45, 47
writing process, 79
Warnings, 233–234, 241
Wartner, Aaron, 230
Watkins, Sherron, 377
WCAG (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines),
Web, writing for, 164–185
addresses on, 59
blogs, 179–180
Build Your Foundation feature, 183–184
Community Connection feature, 185
designing, 172–174
discussion forums, 182
example of, 165
FAQs, 180–181
Trends, exaggeration of, 158
Tripodi, Elizabeth K., 280
Trip reports, 215–216
Trust, working collaboratively and, 96
Tufte, Edward, 298
Tutorials, 244
Twain, Mark, 15
Type size and font, 138, 173
U
UML diagrams, 32
Underlining, to highlight, 139, 255, 261
Undo feature, in word processing software, 95
Unequal workloads, 94
University of Central Florida, 22
University of Chicago Press, 53
University of Delaware, 52
Unreceptive audiences, 309
Unsolicited cover letters, 267–268
Unsolicited proposals, 330–331
Unsolicited recommendation reports, 308, 310
U.S. Census Bureau, 59
U.S. Congress, 377
U.S. Department of Labor, 16, 258
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 200, 213, 241, 377
U.S. Government Publications, Catalog of, 51
Usability, 172
USA Today, 137
US Bank, Inc., 105
Utility, ethics and, 375
V
Validity, 72, 217
Values, 365, 376
Variables, in graphs, 149
Verbal tables, 142–143, 148
Verb plus what word choices, 264
Verbs, 237, 264–265
Video, interactive, 242
Video cameras, 294
Virtual offi ce space, 297
Viruses, computer, 112
VOA (Voice of America), 24
Vocabulary, 394–395
Voice, active and passive, 218
W
WAI (Web Accessibility Initiative), 173
Wall Street Journal, The, 61, 137
Warm Up feature
audiences, 23, 33
cover letters, 267
448 | Index
recommendation reports, 302
resumes, 248
technical reading, 384
technical research, 42
for technical writing overview, 2
writing for Web, 164
writing process, 76
Writing
academic, 15
codes of ethics, 369–372
contracts, 386
expository, 11
expressive, 11
fragmented, 94
imaginative, 16
informal style of, 107
persuasive, 15, 307, 309, 328, 334
recursive, 80
See also Informative reports; Instructions;
Investigative reports; Recommendation reports;
Web, writing for
Writing at Work feature
audiences, 22
correspondence, 105
design of documents, 136
ethics, 364
informative reports, 188
instructions, 230
investigative reports, 212
presentations, 280
proposals, 328
recommendation reports, 307
resumes, 250
technical reading, 386
technical research, 44
for technical writing overview, 6
Web, writing for, 166
writing process, 78
Writing Guides at Colorado State University, 114
Writing process, 76–101
collaborative, 93–98
copyediting in, 90–91
drafting in, 86–87
fi rst draft example, 77
Focus on Technical Writing feature, 76
overview, 79–80
publishing in, 91–92
revising in, 87–89
shaping idea in, 83–86
topic choice in, 81–83
Write to Learn feature, 76
Writing at Work feature, 78
Focus on Technical Writing feature, 164
home pages, 178–179
organizing, 169–171
pages, 50
planning, 168–169
reading web pages for, 167–168
resumes, 262
scannable text for, 176–178
strategies for, 174–176
wikis, 181–182
Write to Learn feature, 164
Writing at Work feature, 166
Your Turn feature, 184–185
Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), 173
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG), 173
Weblogs, 179–180
WebMD.com, 167
Webster’s Dictionary, 49
What phrases after to verbs, 219
Whistle-blowers, 377–378
White papers, 6
White space, 138
Who’s Who in America, 57
Who’s Who in Science, 57
Who’s Who in Small Business, 57
Wigland, Jeffrey, 377
Wikipedia, 181
Wikis, 181–182
Wired magazine, 298
Wireless computing devices, 128
Word choices, for resumes, 263–266
WordPerfect software, 259
Word processing software, 90, 95
Work habits, for collaborative writing, 97–98
Working bibliography, 43, 54–55
Workloads, unequal, 94
Works cited, 54–55, 345, 356
World Book Multimedia Encyclopedia, 49
WorldCat, Online Computer Library Center (OCLC),
48–49
World Wide Web. See Web, writing for
Worms, computer, 112
Write to Learn feature
audience and purpose, 20
correspondence, 102
design of documents, 134
ethics, 362
informative reports, 186
instructions, 228
investigative reports, 210
presentations, 278
proposals, 326
Index | 449
investigative reports, 227
presentations, 300–301
proposals, 360–361
recommendation reports, 324
resumes, 277
technical reading, 399–401
technical research, 75
technical writing overview, 19
Web, writing for, 184–185
writing process, 101
Y
Yahoo.com, 50
Yoder, Andrew, 78
Your Turn feature
audience and purpose, 41
correspondence, 132–133
design of documents, 162–163
ethics, 381–383
informative reports, 208–209
instructions, 248